When you are only about ninety degrees from absolute zero, it is not hot, despite the fact that the sun is shining down on you twenty-four hours a day.
The answer to this riddle is that you are on Uranus, in the arctic circle, where the sun is a bright star almost directly overhead.
And what are you doing on Uranus?
You need the money.
Nils Borgmann, however, was sweating.
And the reason was that the heating unit on his space suit, like the heating units on almost all space suits, was not functioning properly.
The breathing mechanism was in good shape, however, and the oxygenerator on the raft pumped in fresh air in satisfying amounts.
Nils needed money badly, for he had a wife and seven children.
So he said, "Let me down a little farther."
For he saw a big, white shape dimly through the murk--an air lion.
Up on the raft, where they heard the message, the drum went round and paid out another twenty feet of the cable by which Nils Borgmann was suspended in the Uranian atmosphere.
Borgmann took aim and fired.
The shape kept moving.
An air lion's hide is so tough that you have to hit it right under the ribs or through the eye in order to kill it, and Nils could not see that one clearly enough, despite the headlamp on his helmet.
"Get it?"
came the voice in his earphones.
"I'll tell you when I've got one," Nils said.
"We're sending down Petrone."
"How about running the harpoon down to where I am?"
"Okay, Nils.
Sorry," the voice said.
The radio was very comforting to Nils Borgmann.
Through it he felt close to the surface, as if he had friends ready to help him at any moment.
It made him forget the real dangers of his situation.
Nils saw the harpoon come jerking down into his reach.
He grabbed it with his left hand, then held out his right for another shot at the air lion.
"Take it easy," Petrone's voice came into his eardrums.
"Don't get me with that thing."
"Can you see it?
It's getting away from me."
"I think so," Petrone said.
"I think it's coming my way."
"Oh," Nils said.
That was one more bonus he wouldn't get.
He looked around, hoping to sight another lion.
The sound of a muffled report came in over Nil's earphones.
Then Petrone swore in Italian.
Nils always had to laugh because Petrone would never swear in English.
And then the white shape came looming through the murkiness right at Nils's pistol.
He could even see the animal's eye, whereas usually you were lucky if you could distinguish the head.
He raised his gun and fired and had the satisfaction of seeing the lion flounder and thrash and finally subside, floating aimlessly in the air.
"Got it," Nils said, grinning.
That was another bonus, and each time Nils got a bonus, one of his kids had enough money to get through college.
He threw the harpoon and snagged the beast just behind it's right foreflipper.
Pulling in the harpoon cable, he made certain that the weapon was firmly embedded in the lion's flesh.
"Pull away," he said.
"We think you'd better come up, too," they said on the raft.
"Okay," Nils said.
There was only one more child to earn an education for, and then he was going to quit.
He and the dead lion were pulled up through the atmosphere slowly and gently, but side by side, so that he could look closely at the beast he had killed.
*       *       *       *       * Evolution had been kind to the air lion of Uranus.
To the only animal inhabitant of a planet whose surface temperature is -180 degrees Centigrade, Evolution had granted the thickest fur coat of any animal known to man and a cold-blooded circulatory system.
To the inhabitant of a planet whose atmosphere is mostly hydrogen and methane, Evolution had given a complicated respiratory apparatus that breathed in hydrogen and exhaled hydrogen sulfide.
To retain the balance of Uranian chemistry, Evolution had provided a brittle, yellow, rootless plant-life that inhaled hydrogen sulfide and exhaled hydrogen.
To the inhabitant of a planet where most of the atmosphere was in a liquid state, Evolution had seen to it that the air lion was perfectly capable of living entirely in a liquid environment: a thick skin and heavy bone structure enabled the air lion to withstand the heavy pressures of the Uranian depths, gills made it possible for him to breathe liquids, and his powerful flippers made him the strongest swimmer in the solar system.
One would say that a bountiful Providence had been good to the air lion.
Granted the inconveniences of its environment, certainly the air lion was efficiently equipped by Nature to live on its home planet.
But Providence also provided the air lion with a natural enemy which bade fair to exterminate the species.
And that enemy was women--the same women (or rather, their descendants) who caused the extermination of the egret.
Women on Earth had taken a fancy to air lion coats; and, despite the high cost of these coats (between forty and fifty thousand dollars), the number of air lions was decreasing more rapidly than any species could withstand.
To begin with, air lions were limited to the "northern" hemisphere of Uranus.
Uranus is a topsy-turvey planet, tipped on its axis and rolling around the sun in the plane of its equator.
The "northern" hemisphere, then, is that side of the planet which is always turned toward the sun--for which the sun is the pole star.
This restriction on the area in which air lions may thrive imposed a natural limitation on the number of animals which there were in the first place.
The demand for air lion pelts--despite the fact that the beasts were so large that an entire coat might be made from one of them--caused a dangerous depletion.
*       *       *       *       * Nils's helmet broke atmosphere, and then hands were grappling him, helping him up the ladder, and pulling him aboard the "raft."
The raft actually was a well constructed metal vessel; but, as it did not need a powerful engine, its motor was so weak that it hardly counted.
Its gunwales rose only a few feet out of the air.
Nils, as usual, fell to the deck with a clatter.
One of the space-suited men on the raft knelt down to look at him.
"Hi, Borgmann," the man said.
"Congratulations."
His name was Kerr.
Nils smiled.
Yes, it was worth congratulations.
He was now only one lion--only one bonus--away from his goal, and then he could quit.
And he'd be glad to quit.
Dangling by a cable in liquid atmosphere is not safe work, and Borgmann was getting old for that kind of thing.
Another man squatted down and said, "Yeah, Nils.
Happy birthday."
Birthday!
Nils had forgotten all about it.
That was right--he was thirty-five today.
Realizing that he must have looked puzzled, he laughed.
"It slipped my mind completely," he explained.
"When you're on another planet, Earth dates get all mixed up."
Kerr said, "The captain's ordered you aloft for a physical check-up.
It came over the radio while you were down."
Nils Borgmann stopped laughing.
That could mean he'd never get a chance to make another plunge, never have another crack at an air lion, never collect that seventh bonus.
They'd rotate him, put him on the mother ship and fill in on the raft with a substitute.
Nils clambered to his feet, helped by Kerr and the other man, and walked over to take a look at the air lion he had just killed.
It was a good, big beast, its fur still that faint yellowish color that was bleached out on Earth.
It looked something like a walrus, but without any tusks.
"Just one more," Nils said, "and I'm going to quit.
I've got thirty thousand dollars in bonuses, on top of my pay."
Kerr said, "That's almost enough to buy your wife an air lion coat.
That'd be a nice present, so that you could be reminded of your happy days on Uranus every time she wore it."
Nils laughed and said, "Go to hell."
He was feeling pretty good again.
Kerr always perked him up.
After all, a physical examination might be just routine; they might find out that he could go on hunting air lions for five more years if he wanted to.
The scout came roaring over the horizon; but no one could hear it in the airlessness.
Somebody saw it and said, "Here comes Erskine!"
and everybody turned to watch.
The scout was a gaudy red and came in low over the surface of the atmosphere.
It put out its pontoons and came to a landing near the raft.
Then it taxied over slowly, its jets running at their lowest speed.
When it got very close it cut its motors and men in clumsy space suits grappled it and made it fast with ropes.
Erskine hopped out of the scout.
You could tell who it was from the cocky stride and the colorfully decorated suit, which he spent hours in painting and shining.
"Who's Nils Borgmann?"
he asked.
"The lucky man gets a trip upstairs for tonight.
You scow jockeys will have to sleep out in the cold again."
Actually, the raftsmen lived in an air-filled bubble in the center of the raft which was comfortable and warm.
But it was a standing joke that the men "upstairs," in the ship that wheeled idly in its orbit around Uranus, slept in feather beds every night with all the comforts of home except women--and some rumors even gave them that advantage.
"Here I am," Borgmann said.
"Let's go," Erskine said.
"This smell offends my nostrils.
I just don't know how you guys stand it down here."
Somebody guffawed, and somebody else began singing, "Swing low, sweet chariot, comin' for to carry me home...."        *       *       *       *       * Borgmann walked to Erskine's side and let the scout pilot boost him into the cabin.
"So long, suckers," Erskine said as he climbed into the scout and clanged the door shut behind him.
He pressed a button which cleared out the faint traces of Uranian atmosphere in the cabin and pumped in an Earth-type mixture.
Then he unscrewed his helmet and grinned at Nils, who by then was struggling with his own.
"I hear you got your sixth one today," he said, starting up the jets.
"That's right," Nils answered self-consciously.
"Well, that's good.
There aren't many men with six lions to their credit."
He took off, and Nils could feel the scout rising, heading out into space.
Erskine was busy with his navigation, and Nils was glad that there was little time for conversation.
He leaned back and closed his eyes.
He was always tired after a plunge.
But sleep would not come, and he roused himself and peered out of the porthole.
By this time the raft had dwindled to a speck on the vast, featureless surface, and the scout had climbed high above it.
The sky was black, even though it was a region of eternal day.
On the raft, far below, little sparkles of light moved in a random dance--the headlamps of the men.
But out and away the scout moved until the horizon lay between it and the raft.
High and higher it went until the planet was a smooth, gray ball beneath and behind it.
And then, out of the black daylight sky, a pattern of red and green lights seemed to take shape above them and ahead.
It was _Proserpine_, their ship.
The scout and the ship fell toward each other at tremendous speeds: the ship loomed huge, like a great silver cigar, then like a curved wall, then like a metal hand someone was holding up just outside the portholes so that you could not see out.
It seemed to Nils that it was inevitable that they crash.
Erskine flipped the ship over, but there was no discomfort because neither he nor Nils had any weight to be displaced.
And then Nils saw him flip the toggle that turned on the scout's magnetic grapple.
There was a scrape and a jarring bump that sent Nils floating out into weightlessness.
And the scout had arrived home.
The scout was swung into the ship by powerful motors, and after the ringing of the bell which signified that the scout's berth was filled with air, the two men emerged from the small craft and went into the ship.
Captain Davis was there to greet them.
"Good trip," he told Erskine.
"Borgmann, I'll bet you're happy to get aboard ship again."
He shook hands vigorously.
"We have a good hot dinner waiting for you, and then a bath and a soft bed.
You'll see Dr. Carpenter in the morning."
And, after months on the raft, life on board _Proserpine_ was a luxury.
The food was good; even though it, like that on the raft, came from cans, it was prepared with more artistry.
There were no facilities for bathing on the raft, and the streaming water of the shower and rich suds of the soap was a real sensuous delight.
And the beds--well, the bunks on the raft were good, but there was something about the beds on the ship that were so eminently sleepable that Nils dropped off immediately, not even thinking about the physical examination.
*       *       *       *       * It was the first thing he thought of, however, when he woke up in the morning.
And he was worried.
It seemed, today, very real and inescapable; last night the idea had been so new that he had not really been fully aware of what it might mean.
And immediately after breakfast he was subjected to it.
The doctor was thorough; Nils had to give him credit for that.
And at the end, he said, "Well, Borgmann, it looks like a vacation for you."
Nils had been dreading those words so much that they were really not much of a surprise to him.
But still there was a dejection that he could not overcome.
He said, "What are the chances of my getting one more lion before I have to quit?"
The doctor was surprised.
"Generally the men are glad enough to get off Uranus.
We'll have enough trouble getting one of _Proserpine's_ crewmen to go down there and take your place."
"I know," Nils said, "but with me it's different.
I want one more chance at a lion."
"Well," the doctor said, "you'll have to take that up with Captain Davis.
But, my recommendation is that you stay up here on _Proserpine_ until we go home."
And so Nils took up the matter with Captain Davis.
The captain was also surprised.
"I can't understand it, Nils.
You have thirty thousand dollars in bonuses already, on top of your salary of six thousand for the year.
Why do you want to go down again and take all those chances?"
Nils was not a man for making speeches, but he did his best to explain to the Captain that he had seven children, and it took one air lion to get each of them a college education.
He had one child unprovided for, little Siegfried, and he didn't want to quit until he had taken care of them all.
"Well, that's very commendable, Nils, and I can appreciate your point.
But why are you so certain that it will take exactly five thousand dollars to get each one through college?
There are state universities, you know, and they aren't very expensive.
And if they ran short, they could make their own way for part of the time, you know.
Why don't you just divide the money you have now among the seven kids?"
"I can see I'm not explaining this so good," Nils said.
"But they're my kids, Captain, and I want to do it right for each of them in my own way."
The image of Eric--the oldest and his favorite--came into his mind, and his eyes grew warm and moist.
"Yes, I understand that, Nils, but--" "No, Sir, you don't understand.
I have a dream, and I'm just about to have it come true.
You can't make me stop short now and change the dream."
He wanted to go on, but the words would not come to him.
"Well," Captain Davis said, more seriously now, "maybe you are right."
He nodded, soberly.
"Nils, you've been on Uranus about six Earth months, now.
The doctor says you shouldn't take even one more plunge.
It's hard work, and it's a strain, and you're wearing out.
You're wearing out gradually--but still faster, much faster, than a man would on Earth, no matter what he did.
But this isn't something that just happened yesterday, Nils; it's been going on since you got here.
You were lucky we let you sign on, close as you were to the age limit.
Who can say when you finally crossed the danger line?
Maybe a month, maybe two months ago.
You've been on borrowed time since then, whenever it was.
You shouldn't have taken that plunge yesterday, or perhaps the last fifty plunges.
Do you realize that?"
"I guess so."
"And we're doing you a favor.
Instead of gambling with your life, you can knock off now, take your thirty thousand dollars, and call yourself the winner."
"Captain, I don't care what you say.
It's my dream, and I want to get that seventh lion."
"Nils, you're a stubborn cuss.
All right.
But the minute you get that lion on your harpoon, we're hauling you up."
Nils grinned happily.
"That's a deal," he said.
And so Erskine took Nils back down to the raft.
*       *       *       *       * On Uranus there is no sense trying to make a man adapt to any of the natural divisions of time there, such as the rotation of the moons or the position of the sun; and as long as man is attuned to the artificial twenty-four hour day anyway, that is the most convenient unit of time.
You have sixteen hours to yourself, for whatever you want to do--sleeping, reading, playing the visitapes, or anything else that strikes your fancy in the limited space of the air bubble, half of which is always dark and the other half always light.
But the other eight hours belong to the company.
For six of them you man the pumps or the radio equipment or the cable drum while the other men plunge, and you make your plunges in the other two.
When Nils went on duty that day, he was on the radio, and Kerr was down below.
The optimism he had felt after his talk with the captain was dissipated.
He realized that, after all, the air lions were a disappearing species.
He had been here hunting them for six months and had bagged only six.
One a month--yet that was the best record of any of the men.
And here he was, expecting to get his seventh in the next day or so.
Kerr was calling for more cable.
Nils reassured him absently and signaled the crew at the drum.
The hunter said, "What's the matter, Nils?
You don't sound happy."
Nils said into the microphone, "Don't worry about me.
You watch out for those lions."
He glanced at his watch.
He had been on duty now only twenty minutes.
An hour and forty minutes to go before his plunge.
Usually you took it first, in order to be in your best condition, rested and untired.
But, because Nils had got out of order owing to his trip upstairs, he had to take his plunge after he had already been on duty for two hours.
That was bad.
He would be just a little tired.
He wouldn't be quite in the right condition.
His responses would be just a shade off.
The work would be just that much more dangerous.
And then he thought, What if I don't get back?
What if it's my last plunge?
What if I don't get that air lion?
What if I die down there, Siegfried unprovided for?
Kerr's voice sounded: "I think I see one."
"Need anything?"
Nils asked.
"Not so far.
But I think there's something moving down there."
"Good luck," Nils said.
But his voice was empty.
He was thinking of himself.
There were so many things that might happen to him down there, and he had only now begun to think of them.
*       *       *       *       * An air lion was a big creature.
If one charged you, it could rip you right away from any one or all three of the vital strands that connected you with the surface--cable, air hose, or radio wire.
Actually, the loss of the radio wire was nothing.
When there was a total deadness in his earphones, the radioman signaled frantically and the diver was hauled up.
But loss of either of the other two was fatal.
If your air hose was cut, you died right away, not of lack of oxygen but of the liquid methane and ammonium that got into your breathing apparatus.
If your cable was torn loose, there was a faint chance.
You hung on, if you could, until the old cable could be taken off the drum and a new one put on.
Then they sent it down and the other diver snapped it to your suit.
But the air hose alone might not be capable of sustaining the heavy suit--and if it gave way before the new cable was attached, you were dead.
"There's one!"
Kerr's voice was excited in his earphones.
"I can see him now.
If he gets a little closer, I can get a shot at him."
"We'll send down Newcomb," Nils said.
He stood up and waved to the installation, where Newcomb was sitting placidly, already hooked up to cable, hose, and wire.
Immediately Newcomb rose and clambered over the side, down the ladder.
Nils glanced at his watch again.
Well, only an hour and ten minutes to go.
If an air lion didn't get you, there was the chance that your cable would wear loose or that your air hose would get snarled.
The air hose, after all, was rubberoid and came down loose, not taut.
You could get a kink in it very easily and not be aware of it until that sudden drowsiness that was oxygen starvation hit you.
Then, if you could stay conscious long enough, you could gasp it into the microphone: "My air line's fouled!"
And if they could get you to the surface fast enough, or even just get the kink high enough to straighten it out, then you were saved.
If it took too long, you were gone.
Kerr said, "Missed him, damn it."
"Do you see him, Newcomb?"
Nils asked.
"Not yet," came the cheerful reply.
"He's a big one," Kerr said.
Forty-five minutes to go.
Well, at least there was a big air lion down there, if he hadn't been frightened off by Kerr's shot, and maybe he would still be down there when Nils made his plunge.
So there was a chance, not a big one but a chance all the same, that Nils could pick up his seventh lion today.
But even if the lion was down there, it wasn't at all positive that Nils would get him.
That went without saying.
After all, when you went down every weekday for six months and got only six lions, then it was pretty obvious that you couldn't always bag one when you wanted it.
There were--how many now?--twenty-four men on the raft, and so far they'd got only forty pelts.
About one every four days.
Sometimes weeks went by without a catch.
"I think I see him now," said Newcomb.
"He _is_ a big fellow.
I don't think I've ever seen a bigger one."
"Can you get a shot at him?"
Nils asked.
"I'll try," Newcomb said.
"He's coming straight for me.
Lord, what a monster.
I think I--No, damn it, I missed.
Here, let me--Damn it!
He's--" And then came that peculiar deadness in Nils's eardrums that meant the radio wire had been severed.
Nils jumped to his feet and waved wildly to the crew at the drums.
They began frantically to pull Newcomb up.
Soon he broke surface and was helped up the ladder.
He stood, bewildered, until one of the men led him into the bubble.
"His radio wire snapped," Nils explained to Kerr.
They wouldn't send Newcomb down again today--not after a narrow shave like that.
His nerve would be gone.
Nils stood up.
"I'm going down after that baby," he told the crewmen.
He began to work his way out of the complicated radio equipment, which snapped on over his helmet to take advantage of the built-in radio in his suit.
"Petrone, you take the radio."
*       *       *       *       * Petrone came lumbering over and accepted the rig.
Nils sat on the ready bench and let the other crewmen adjust the equipment he needed.
The rope hooked into the back of his suit; the air hose was connected to the suit oxygenerator, which was strong enough to support a man in airlessness but could not stand the pressure of the Uranian atmosphere and thus needed assistance from the powerful pump on the raft; and the radio wire attached to his light helmet rig.
And then he was going over the side.
He went down--way, way down--and then he saw Kerr.
"How is it?"
Nils asked.
Kerr gestured.
"He's off that way.
He took a swipe at me, and I tried to get a shot at him.
I think I took his ear off, but that's all.
Anyway, he lit out like a jet.
I expect he'll be back, though; probably he's too mad to think straight."
They watched.
While they watched, the harpoon was lowered to them.
Minutes passed, dragging by with interminable slowness while their eyes searched the murky depths, the headlamps making strange patterns, looking for the air lion.
And then Nils spotted him--too late.
"Look out behind you!"
he shouted desperately.
But he was too late.
The air lion's powerful flippers forced him through the atmosphere with astonishing speed, and he struck Kerr with tremendous force and impact before the other diver could even turn around.
"God!"
Nils muttered into his mouthpiece, horrified, as the lines snapped with the lion's onslaught and Kerr began to hurtle down toward the bottom of the sea of atmosphere, down to where the Uranian air was frozen solid.
"Did it get him?"
Petrone's voice sounded in the earphones.
"Cut him off like a knife," Nils said.
"We're going to pull you up.
That baby's too rough to handle."
"I'm staying down," Nils said.
And the tone of his voice showed that he meant it.
"Well, we'll send Newcomb down again," Petrone said.
"Let him get his rest," Nils said.
"I just got here."
The lion, meanwhile, had seen Nils with his weak eyes and was coming toward him.
Nils held up his pistol and took steady aim.
He waited until he could quite easily see that the lion did, in fact, lack an ear.
And then he pulled the trigger.
Nothing happened.
This occasionally occurred.
The pistols were very intricate mechanisms, designed so that none of the liquid atmosphere could get into them at the same time that the bullet got out.
And like all intricate mechanisms, occasionally they went wrong.
The air lion was coming closer, hurtling through the liquid air now with strong beats of his powerful flippers.
Nils pulled the trigger again.
And again nothing happened.
He could feel the sweat running down his face.
The lion was looming larger now; it was almost upon him.
Nils could see the creature's ugly, yellow eyes.
He pulled the trigger a third time.
One of the eyes suddenly disappeared, to be replaced by a hole, from which a yellow fluid poured.
But the impact of the bullet had not stopped the momentum of the lion.
The body fell into Nils with a sudden jerk.
Nils dropped suddenly, then stopped with a wrenching snap.
"What's the matter?"
Petrone said in his earphones.
Nils assessed the damage.
"I've broken my cable," he said.
"I've still got the air hose and radio wire."
Petrone swore softly in Italian.
Nils changed the subject.
"Get the harpoon about four feet lower, quick.
I don't want to lose this baby."
The harpoon came down within his grasp, and he impaled the dead air lion on it.
"Okay," Nils said "haul him up."
*       *       *       *       * The pale shape of the lion began to rise above him.
The idea came to him of attempting to grab hold of the lion so as to be pulled up with it.
One of the men in his predicament had tried that once; the harpoon cable had broken and both man and lion had been lost.
No, there was nothing to do but wait--and pray.
Nils dangled there, in the atmosphere, like a marionette on a single string.
Well, he thought, this may be the end.
He tried to puzzle out why he wasn't frightened.
Was it because he was still full of triumph from getting that seventh lion?
Perhaps.
But more likely it was because there was still a chance that he could be saved, and a man never gives up hope until he thinks that there isn't a chance any more.
"Hold on, Nils," Petrone's voice said.
"Everything's coming all right.
We have to put a new cable on Kerr's drum, too, you know.
But we'll have 'em both ready at about the same time, so that won't slow us down."
"I think I'll drop my gun," Nils said.
"It doesn't weigh very much, but it may make a difference."
"And lose the company five hundred smackers?"
Petrone asked.
"Okay it's your salary they'll dock.
I'd rather let the air lions get me."
Nils chuckled.
He worked the gun loose from his gauntleted hand--rather an awkward process, for the guns were designed to be held securely by heavy gloves.
Then he released it and watched it plunge down.
Down.
Would he be following it?
Would his last plunge end that way?
For the first time he began to feel a twinge of fear.
The sweat started out on his forehead, and he could feel it under his arms.
He loved his wife and every one of those seven kids.
He wished he could see just one of those kids again.
Especially Eric.
His memory showed him Eric's grinning face, and he bit back a sob.
But to die out here, millions of miles--hundreds of millions of miles!--away from them, so that they wouldn't even know it for months: that was too much.
"We're ready to start," Petrone said.
"I'm coming down myself to get you."
Nils didn't answer.
He was thinking.
How long have I been here already?
How much longer can I hold out?
"Nils?"
"I'm okay," he managed to mutter.
What would it be like?
How fast would you go?
And what would you see, down there on the bottom of the liquid layer of the Uranian atmosphere?
There would probably be more of those funny brittle yellow plants that sometimes floated even this high; but no man had ever explored the floor of the liquid air.
Would it be smooth, like a ball?
Kerr would be down there to keep him company.
Damn it, he'd liked Kerr.
Was it his imagination, or was he really starting to slip?
The trouble was that there wasn't anything he could use to measure by, no fixed point to tell whether he was already going down or not.
But once the air line broke, he'd be dead like that.
He'd never see the bottom even when he got there.
Hundreds of millions of miles!
"Eric!"
Petrone's voice said, "What?"
But Nils ignored him.
What would it be like to die like that?
Would he even know it?
Or would he strangle and gasp and shriek?
He was sweating heavily now.
Just once, O Lord, just once more.
Just to see them.
Well, this was his last plunge, either way.
He was going to quit as soon as he had his seventh lion; he had it now, and he was through.
One way or another.
"Gotcha!"
It was Petrone's voice.
Nils couldn't hear the new cable click into place in his back; but he felt it.
And then he felt the slow and steady pull as he was drawn up out of the depths.
*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LAST PLUNGE *** Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will be renamed.
Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!)
can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties.
Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.
Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark.
If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy.
You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research.
Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.
START: FULL LICENSE THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license.
Section 1.
General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works 1.A.
By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement.
If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
1.B.
"Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.
It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.
There are a few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.
See paragraph 1.C below.
There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.
See paragraph 1.E below.
1.C.
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.
Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States.
If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed.
Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work.
You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.
1.D.
The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work.
Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change.
If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg-tm work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United States.
1.E.
Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg: 1.E.1.
The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed:   This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and   most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no   restrictions whatsoever.
You may copy it, give it away or re-use it   under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this   eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org.
If you are not located in the   United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where   you are located before using this eBook.
1.E.2.
If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges.
If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.3.
If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder.
Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
1.E.4.
Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.
1.E.5.
Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg-tm License.
1.E.6.
You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word processing or hypertext form.
However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
1.E.7.
Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.8.
You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided that: * You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from   the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method   you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.
The fee is owed   to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has   agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project   Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.
Royalty payments must be paid   within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are   legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns.
Royalty   payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project   Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in   Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg   Literary Archive Foundation."
* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies   you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he   does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm   License.
You must require such a user to return or destroy all   copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue   all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm   works.
* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of   any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the   electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of   receipt of the work.
* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free   distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.
1.E.9.
If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.
Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
1.F.
1.F.1.
Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm collection.
Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.
1.F.2.
LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees.
YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.
YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
1.F.3.
LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from.
If you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund.
If you received the work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.
If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.
1.F.4.
Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
1.F.5.
Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law.
The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
1.F.6.
INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.
Section 2.
Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.
It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will remain freely available for generations to come.
In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org Section 3.
Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.
The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.
Email contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact Section 4.
Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment.
Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these requirements.
We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.
To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States.
U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and addresses.
Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate Section 5.
General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone.
For forty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.
Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included.
Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
Most people start at our website which has the main PG search facility: www.gutenberg.org This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm, including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Minds and Manners of Wild Animals by William T. Hornaday Copyright laws are changing all over the world.
Be sure to check the copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.
This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project Gutenberg file.
Please do not remove it.
Do not change or edit the header without written permission.
Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.
Included is important information about your specific rights and restrictions in how the file may be used.
You can also find out about how to make a donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.
**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts** **eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971** *****These eBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!
***** Title: The Minds and Manners of Wild Animals Author: William T. Hornaday Release Date: July, 2004 [EBook #6052] [Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule] [This file was first posted on October 28, 2002] Edition: 10 Language: English *** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WILD ANIMALS *** Produced by Ralph Zimmermann, Charles Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.
[Illustration with caption: OVERPOWERING CURIOSITY OF A MOUNTAIN SHEEP This "lava ram" stood thus on a lava crest in the Pinacate Mountains for about twenty minutes, gazing spellbound at two men and a pack mule.
(See page 149)] THE MINDS AND MANNERS OF WILD ANIMALS A BOOK OF PERSONAL OBSERVATIONS BY WILLIAM T. HORNADAY, Sc.D., A.M. DIRECTOR OF THE NEW YORK ZOOLOGICAL PARK.
AUTHOR OF "THE AMERICAN NATURAL HISTORY," "TWO YEARS IN THE JUNGLE," "CAMP FIRES IN THE CANADIAN ROCKIES," "OUR VANISHING WILD LIFE," ETC.
WITH ILLUSTRATIONS _The wild animal must think, or die._* * * * * _"Prove all things; hold fast that which is good.
"_ COPYRIGHT, 1922, BY WILLIAM T. HORNADAY Printed in the United States of America _The right of translation is reserved_ Published May, 1922 TO THE OFFICERS AND MEN OF THE NEW YORK ZOOLOGICAL PARK, WHOSE SAFETY DEPENDS UPON THEIR KNOWLEDGE OF THE MINDS OF WILD ANIMALS, THIS VOLUME IS DEDICATED AS A TOKEN OF APPRECIATION AND REGARD  CONTENTS  I.
A SURVEY OF THE FIELD      I.
THE LAY OF THE LAND     II.
WILD ANIMAL TEMPERAMENT & INDIVIDUALITY    III.
THE LANGUAGE OF ANIMALS     IV.
THE MOST INTELLIGENT ANIMALS      V. THE RIGHTS OF WILD ANIMALS  II.
MENTAL TRAITS OF WILD ANIMALS     VI.
THE BRIGHTEST MINDS AMONG ANIMALS    VII.
KEEN BIRDS AND DULL MEN   VIII.
THE MENTAL STATUS OF THE ORANG-UTAN     IX.
THE MAN-LIKENESS OF THE CHIMPANZEE      X.
THE TRUE MENTAL STATUS OF THE GORILLA     XI.
THE MIND OF THE ELEPHANT    XII.
THE MENTAL AND MORAL TRAITS OF BEARS   XIII.
MENTAL TRAITS OF A FEW RUMINANTS    XIV.
MENTAL TRAITS OF A FEW RODENTS     XV.
THE MENTAL TRAITS OF BIRDS    XVI.
THE WISDOM OF THE SERPENT   XVII.
THE TRAINING OF WILD ANIMALS  III.
THE HIGHER PASSIONS  XVIII.
THE MORALS OF WILD ANIMALS    XIX.
THE LAWS OF THE FLOCKS AND HERDS     XX.
PLAYS AND PASTIMES OF WILD ANIMALS    XXI.
COURAGE IN WILD ANIMALS  IV.
THE BASER PASSIONS   XXII.
FEAR AS A RULING PASSION  XXIII.
FIGHTING AMONG WILD ANIMALS   XXIV.
WILD ANIMAL CRIMINALS AND CRIME    XXV.
FIGHTING WITH WILD ANIMALS THE CURTAIN.
PREFACE During these days of ceaseless conflict, anxiety and unrest among men, when at times it begins to look as if "the Caucasian" really is "played out," perhaps the English-reading world will turn with a sigh of relief to the contemplation of wild animals.
At all events, the author has found this diversion in his favorite field mentally agreeable and refreshing.
In comparison with some of the alleged men who now are cursing this earth by their baneful presence, the so-called "lower animals" do not seem so very "low" after all!
As a friend of the animals, this is a very proper time in which to compare them with men.
Furthermore, if thinking men and women desire to know the leading facts concerning the intelligence of wild animals, it will be well to consider them now, before the bravest and the best of the wild creatures of the earth go down and out under the merciless and inexorable steam roller that we call Civilization.
The intelligence and the ways of wild animals are large subjects.
Concerning them I do not offer this volume as an all-in-all production.
Out of the great mass of interesting things that might have been included, I have endeavored to select and set forth only enough to make a good series of sample exhibits, without involving the general reader in a hopelessly large collection of details.
The most serious question has been: What shall be left out?
Mr. A. R. Spofford, first Librarian of Congress, used to declare that "Books are made from books"; but I call the reader to bear witness that this volume is not a mass of quotations.
A quoted authority often can be disputed, and for this reason the author has found considerable satisfaction in relying chiefly upon his own testimony.
Because I always desire to know the _opinions_ of men who are writing upon their own observations, I have felt free to express my own conclusions regarding the many phases of animal intelligence as their manifestation has impressed me in close-up observations.
I have purposely avoided all temptations to discuss the minds and manners of domestic animals, partly because that is by itself a large subject, and partly because their minds have been so greatly influenced by long and close association with man.
The domestic mammals and birds deserve independent treatment.
A great many stories of occurrences have been written into this volume, for the purpose of giving the reader all the facts in order that he may form his own opinions of the animal mentality displayed.
Most sincerely do I wish that the boys and girls of America, and of the whole world, may be induced to believe that _the most interesting thing about a wild animal is its mind and its reasoning,_ and that a dead animal is only a poor decaying thing.
If the feet of the young men would run more to seeing and studying the wild creatures and less to the killing of them, some of the world's valuable species might escape being swept away tomorrow, or the day after.
The author gratefully acknowledges his indebtedness to Munsey's Magazine, McClure's Magazine and the Sunday Magazine Syndicate for permission to copy herein various portions of his chapters from those publications.
W. T. H. The Anchorage, Stamford, Conn. December 19, 1921.
ILLUSTRATIONS  Overpowering Curiosity of a Mountain Sheep  Christmas at the Primates' House  The Trap-Door Spider's Door and Burrow  Hanging Nest of the Baltimore Oriole Great  Hanging Nests of the Crested Cacique  "Rajah," the Actor Orang-Utan  Thumb-Print of an Orang-Utan  The Lever That Our Orang-Utan Invented  Portrait of a High-Caste Chimpanzee  The Gorilla With the Wonderful Mind  Tame Elephants Assisting in Tying a Wild Captive  Wild Bears Quickly Recognize  Protection Alaskan Brown Bear,  "Ivan," Begging for Food  The Mystery of Death  The Steady-Nerved and Courageous Mountain Goat  Fortress of an Arizona Pack-Rat  Wild Chipmunks Respond to Man's Protection  An Opossum Feigning Death  Migration of the Golden Plover.
(Map)  Remarkable Village Nests of the Sociable Weaver Bird  Spotted Bower-Bird, at Work on Its Unfinished Bower Hawk-Proof  Nest of a Cactus Wren  A Peace Conference With an Arizona Rattlesnake  Work Elephant Dragging a Hewn Timber The Wrestling Bear,  "Christian," and His Partner  Adult Bears at Play  Primitive Penguins on the Antarctic Continent, Unafraid of Man  Richard W. Rock and His Buffalo Murderer  "Black Beauty" Murdering "Apache" THE MINDS AND MANNERS OF WILD ANIMALS MAN AND THE WILD ANIMALS If every man devoted to his affairs, and to the affairs of his city and state, the same measure of intelligence and honest industry that every warm-blooded wild animal devotes to its affairs, the people of this world would abound in good health, prosperity, peace and happiness.
To assume that every wild beast and bird is a sacred creature, peacefully dwelling in an earthly paradise, is a mistake.
They have their wisdom and their folly, their joys and their sorrows, their trials and tribulations.
As the alleged lord of creation, it is man's duty to know the wild animals truly as they are, in order to enjoy them to the utmost, to utilize them sensibly and fairly, and to give them a square deal.
I.
A SURVEY OF THE FIELD I THE LAY OF THE LAND There is a vast field of fascinating human interest, lying only just outside our doors, which as yet has been but little explored.
It is the Field of Animal Intelligence.
Of all the kinds of interest attaching to the study of the world's wild animals, there are none that surpass the study of their minds, their morals, and the acts that they perform as the results of their mental processes.
In these pages, the term "animal" is not used in its most common and most restricted sense.
It is intended to apply not only to quadrupeds, but also to all the vertebrate forms,--mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians and fishes.
For observation and study, the whole vast world of living creatures is ours, throughout all zones and all lands.
It is not ours to flout, to abuse, or to exterminate as we please.
While for practical reasons we do not here address ourselves to the invertebrates, nor even to the sea-rovers, we can not keep them out of the background of our thoughts.
The living world is so vast and so varied, so beautiful and so ugly, so delightful and so terrible, so interesting and so commonplace, that each step we make through it reveals things different and previously unknown.
The Frame of Mind.
To the inquirer who enters the field of animal thought with an open mind, and free from the trammels of egotism and fear regarding man's place in nature, this study will prove an endless succession of surprises and delights.
In behalf of the utmost tale of results, the inquirer should summon to his aid his rules of evidence, his common sense, his love of fair play, and the inexorable logic of his youthful geometry.
And now let us clear away a few weeds from the entrance to our field, and reveal its cornerstones and boundary lines.
To a correct understanding of any subject a correct point of view is absolutely essential.
In a commonplace and desultory way man has been mildly interested in the intelligence of animals for at least 30,000 years.
The Cro- Magnons of that far time possessed real artistic talent, and on the smooth stone walls and ceilings of the caves of France they drew many wonderful pictures of mammoths, European bison, wild cattle, rhinoceroses and other animals of their period.
Ever since man took unto himself certain tractable wild animals, and made perpetual thralls of the horse, the dog, the cat, the cattle, sheep, goats and swine, he has noted their intelligent ways.
Ever since the first caveman began to hunt wild beasts and slay them with clubs and stones, the two warring forces have been interested in each other, but for about 25,000 years I think that the wild beasts knew about as much of man's intelligence as men knew of theirs.
I leave to those who are interested in history the task of revealing the date, or the period, when scholarly men first began to pay serious attention to the animal mind.
In 1895 when Mr. George J. Romanes, of London, published his excellent work on "Animal Intelligence," on one of its first pages he blithely brushed aside as of little account all the observations, articles and papers on his subject that had been published previous to that time.
Now mark how swiftly history can repeat itself, and also bring retribution.
In 1910 there arose in the United States of America a group of professional college-and-university animal psychologists who set up the study of "animal behavior."
They did this so seriously, and so determinedly, that one of the first acts of two of them consisted in joyously brushing aside as of no account whatever, and quite beneath serious consideration, everything that had been seen, done and said previous to the rise of their group, and the laboratory Problem Box.
In view of what this group has accomplished since 1910, with their "problem boxes," their "mazes" and their millions of "trials by error," expressed in solid pages of figures, the world of animal lovers is entitled to smile tolerantly upon the cheerful assumptions of ten years ago.
But let it not at any time be assumed that we are destitute of problem boxes; for the author has two of his own!
One is called the Great Outdoors, and the other is named the New York Zoological Park.
The first has been in use sixty years, the latter twenty-two years.
Both are today in good working order, but the former is not quite as good as new.
A Preachment to the Student.
In studying the wild-animal mind, the boundary line between Reality and Dreamland is mighty easy to cross.
He who easily yields to seductive reasoning, and the call of the wild imagination, soon will become a dreamer of dreams and a seer of visions of things that never occurred.
The temptation to place upon the simple acts of animals the most complex and far- fetched interpretations is a trap ever ready for the feet of the unwary.
It is better to see nothing than to see a lot of things that are not true.
In the study of animals, we have long insisted that _to the open eye and the thinking brain, truth is stranger than fiction._ But Truth does not always wear her heart upon her sleeve for zanies to peck at.
Unfortunately there are millions of men who go through the world looking at animals, but not seeing them.
Beware of setting up for wild animals impossible mental and moral standards.
The student must not deceive himself by overestimating mental values.
If an estimate must be made, make it under the mark of truth rather than above it.
While avoiding the folly of idealism, we also must shun the ways of the narrow mind, and the eyes that refuse to see the truth.
Wild animals are not superhuman demigods of wisdom; but neither are they idiots, unable to reason from cause to effect along the simple lines that vitally affect their existence.
Brain-owning wild animals are not mere machines of flesh and blood, set agoing by the accident of birth, and running for life on the narrow-gauge railway of Heredity.
They are not "Machines in Fur and Feathers," as one naturalist once tried to make the world believe them to be.
Some animals have more intelligence than some men; and some have far better morals.
What Constitutes Evidence.
The best evidence regarding the ways of wild animals is one's own eye-witness testimony.
Not all second- hand observations are entirely accurate.
Many persons do not know how to observe; and at times some are deceived by their own eyes or ears.
It is a sad fact that both those organs are easily deceived.
The student who is in doubt regarding the composition of evidence will do well to spend a few days in court listening to the trial of an important and hotly contested case.
In collecting real evidence, all is not gold that glitters.
Many a mind misinterprets the thing seen, sometimes innocently, and again wantonly.
The nature fakir is always on the alert to see wonderful phenomena in wild life, about which to write; and by preference he places the most strained and marvellous interpretation upon the animal act.
Beware of the man who always sees marvellous things in animals, for he is a dangerous guide.
There is one man who claims to have seen in his few days in the woods more wonders than all the older American naturalists and sportsmen have seen added together.
Now, Nature does not assemble all her wonderful phenomena and hold them in leash to be turned loose precisely when the great Observer of Wonders spends his day in the woods.
Wise men always suspect the man who sees too many marvelous things.
The Relative Value of Witnesses.
It is due that a word should be said regarding "expert testimony" in the case of the wild animal.
Some dust has been raised in this field by men posing as authorities on wild animal psychology, whose observations of the world's wild animals have been confined to the chipmunks, squirrels, weasels, foxes, rabbits, and birds dwelling within a small circle surrounding some particular woodland house.
In another class other men have devoted heavy scientific labors to laboratory observations on white rats, domestic rabbits, cats, dogs, sparrows, turtles and newts as the handpicked exponents of the intelligence of the animals of the world!
Alas!
for the human sense of Proportion!
Fancy an ethnologist studying the Eskimo, the Dog-Rib Indian, the Bushman, the Aino and the Papuan, and then proceeding to write conclusively "On the Intelligence of the Human Race."
The proper place in which to study the minds, manners and morals of wild animals is in the most thickly populated haunts of the most intelligent species.
The free and untrammeled animal, busily working out its own destiny unhindered by man, is the beau-ideal animal to observe and to study.
Go to the plain, the wilderness, the desert and the mountain, not merely to shoot everything on foot, but to SEE _animals at home,_ and there use your eyes and your field-glass.
See what _normal wild animals_ do as "behavior," and then try to find out why they do it.
The next best place for study purposes is a spacious, sanitary and well-stocked zoological park, wherein are assembled great collections of the most interesting land vertebrates that can be procured, from all over the earth.
There the student can observe many new traits of wild animal character, as they are brought to the surface by captivity.
There will some individuals reveal the worst traits of their species.
Others will reveal marvels in mentality, and teach lessons such as no man can learn from them in the open.
To study temperament, there is no place like a zoo.
Even there, however, the wisest course,--as it seems to me,--is not to introduce too many appliances as aids to mental activity, but rather to see what the animal subject thinks and does _by its own initiative._ In the testing of memory and the perceptive faculties, training for performances is the best method to pursue.
The reader has a right to know that the author of this volume has enjoyed unparalleled opportunities for the observation and study of highly intelligent wild animals, both in their wild haunts and in a great vivarium; and these combined opportunities have covered a long series of years.
Before proceeding farther, it is desirable to define certain terms that frequently will be used in these pages.
THE ANIMAL BRAIN is the generator of the mind, and the clearing- house of the senses.
As a mechanism, the brain of man is the most perfect, and in the descent through the mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians and fishes, the brain progressively is simplified in form and function.
THOUGHT is the result of the various processes of the brain and nervous system, stimulated by the contributions of the senses.
SANITY is the state of normal, orderly and balanced thought, as formulated by a healthy brain.
INSANITY is a state of mental disease, resulting in disordered, unbalanced and chaotic thought, destitute of reason.
REASON is the manifestation of correct observation and healthful thought which recognizes both cause and effect, and leads from premise to conclusion.
INTELLIGENCE is created by the possession of knowledge either inherited or acquired.
It may be either latent or active; and it is the forerunner of reason.
INSTINCT is the knowledge or impulse which animals or men derive from their ancestors by inheritance, and which they obey, either consciously or subconsciously in working out their own preservation, increase and betterment.
Instinct often functions as a sixth sense.
EDUCATION is the acquirement of knowledge by precept or by observation; but animals as well as men may be self-taught, and become self-educated, by the diligent exercise of the observing and reasoning faculties.
The adjustment of a wild animal mind to conditions unknown to its ancestors is through the process of self-education, and by logical reasoning from premise to conclusion.
The wild animal must think, or die.
Animal intelligence varies in quantity and quality as much as animals vary in size.
Idiots, maniacs and sleeping persons are the only classes of human beings who are devoid of intelligence and reasoning power.
Idiots and maniacs also are often devoid of the common animal _instinct_ that ordinarily promotes self- preservation from fire, water and high places.
A heavily sleeping person is often so sodden in slumber that his senses of smell and hearing are temporarily dead; and many a sleeping man has been asphyxiated by gas or smoke, or burned to death, because his deadened senses failed to arouse him at the critical moment.
(This dangerous condition of mind can be cured by efforts of the will, exercised prior to sleep, through a determination resolutely to arouse and investigate every unusual sensation that registers "danger" on any one of the senses.)
The normal individual sleeps with a subconscious and sensitive mind, from which thought and reason have not been entirely eliminated.
Every act of a man or animal, vertebrate or invertebrate, is based upon either _reason_ or _hereditary instinct._ It is a mistake to assume that because an organism is small it necessarily has no "mind," and none of the propelling impulse that we call thought.
The largest whale may have less intelligence and constructive reasoning than a trap-door spider, a bee or an ant.
To deny this is to deny the evidence of one's senses.
A MEASURE FOR ANIMAL INTELLIGENCE.
The intelligence of an animal may be estimated by taking into account, separately, its mental qualities, about as follows: 1.
General knowledge of surrounding conditions.
2.
Powers of independent observation and reasoning.
3.
Memory.
4.
Comprehension under tuition.
5.
Accuracy in the execution of man's orders.
Closely allied to these are the _moral qualities_ which go to make up an animal's temperament and disposition, about as follows: 1.
Amiability, which guarantees security to its associates.
2.
Patience, or submission to discipline and training.
3.
Courage, which gives self-confidence and steadiness.
4.
A disposition to obedience, with cheerfulness.
All normal vertebrate animals exercise their intelligence in accordance with their own rules of logic.
Had they not been able to do so, it is reasonable to suppose that they could never have developed into vertebrates, reaching even up to man himself.
According to the laws of logic, this proposition is no more open to doubt or dispute than is the existence of the Grand Canyon of the Colorado.
But few persons have seen the Canyon, and far fewer ever have proven its existence by descending to its bottom; but none the less Reason admonishes all of us that the great chasm exists, and is not a debatable question.
To men and women who really know the vertebrate animals by contact with some of them upon their own levels, the reasoning power of the latter is not a debatable question.
The only real question is: how far does their intelligence carry them?
It is with puzzled surprise that we have noted the curious diligence of the professors of animal psychology in always writing of "animal _behavior_," and never of old-fashioned, common-sense _animal intelligence_.
Can it be possible that any one of them really refuses to concede to the wild animal the possession of a mind, and a working intelligence?
Yes.
Animals do reason.
If any one truth has come out of all the critical or uncritical study of the animal mind that has been going on for two centuries, it is this.
Animals do reason; they always have reasoned, and as long as animals live they never will cease to reason.
The higher wild animals possess and display the same fundamental passions and emotions that animate the human race.
This fact is subject to intelligent analysis, discussion and development, but it is not by any means a "question" subject to debate.
In the most intellectual of the quadrupeds, birds and reptiles, the display of fear, courage, love, hate, pleasure, displeasure, confidence, suspicion, jealousy, pity, greed and generosity are so plainly evident that even children can and do recognize them.
To the serious and open-minded student who devotes prolonged thought to these things, they bring the wild animal very near to the "lord of creation."
To the question, "Have wild animals souls?"
we reply, "That is a debatable question.
Read; then think it over."
METHODS WITH THE ANIMAL MIND.
In the study of animal minds, much depends upon the method employed.
It seems to me that the problem- box method of the investigators of "animal behavior" leaves much to be desired.
Certainly it is not calculated to develop the mental status of animals along lines of natural mental progression.
To place a wild creature in a great artificial contrivance, fitted with doors, cords, levers, passages and what not, is enough to daze or frighten any timid animal out of its normal state of mind and nerves.
To put a wild sapajou monkey,-- weak, timid and afraid,--in a strange and formidable prison box filled with strange machinery, and call upon it to learn or to invent strange mechanical processes, is like bringing a boy of ten years up to a four-cylinder duplex Hoe printing-and-folding press, and saying to him: "Now, go ahead and find out how to run this machine, and print both sides of a signature upon it."
The average boy would shrink from the mechanical monster, and have no stomach whatever for "trial by error."
I think that the principle of determining the mind of a wild animal _along the lines of the professor_ is not the best way.
It should be developed _along the natural lines of the wild-animal mind._ It should be stimulated to do what it feels most inclined to do, and educated to achieve real mental progress.
I think that the ideal way to study the minds of apes, baboons and monkeys would be to choose a good location in a tropical or sub- tropical climate that is neither too wet nor too dry, enclose an area of five acres with an unclimbable fence, and divide it into as many corrals as there are species to be experimented upon.
Each corral would need a shelter house and indoor playroom.
The stage properties should be varied and abundant, and designed to stimulate curiosity as well as activity.
Somewhere in the program I would try to teach orang-utans and chimpanzees the properties of fire, and how to make and tend fires.
I would try to teach them the seed-planting idea, and the meaning of seedtime and harvest.
I would teach sanitation and cleanliness of habit,--a thing much more easily done than most persons suppose.
I would teach my apes to wash dishes and to cook, and I am sure that some of them would do no worse than some human members of the profession who now receive $50 per month, or more, for spoiling food.
In one corral I would mix up a chimpanzee, an orang-utan, a golden baboon and a good-tempered rhesus monkey.
My apes would begin at two years old, because after seven or eight years of age all apes are difficult, or even impossible, as subjects for peaceful experimentation.
I would try to teach a chimpanzee the difference between a noise and music, between heat and cold, between good food and bad food.
Any trainer can teach an animal the difference between the blessings of peace and the horrors of war, or in other words, obedience and good temper versus cussedness and punishment.
Dr. Yerkes' laboratory in Montecito, California, and his experiments there with an orang-utan and other primates, were in a good place, and made a good beginning.
It is very much to be hoped that means will be provided by which his work can be prosecuted indefinitely, and under the most perfect conditions that money can provide.
I hope that I will live long enough to see Dr. Yerkes develop the mind of a young grizzly bear in a four-acre lot, to the utmost limits of that keen and sagacious personality.
II WILD ANIMAL TEMPERAMENT AND INDIVIDUALITY In man and in vertebrate animals generally, temperament is the foundation of intelligence and progress.
Fifty years ago Fowler and Wells, the founders of the science of phrenology and physiognomy, very wisely differentiated and defined four "temperaments" of mankind.
The six types now recognized by me are the _morose, lymphatic, sanguine, nervous, hysterical_ and _combative_; and their names adequately describe them.
This classification applies to the higher wild animals, quite as truly as to men.
By the manager of wild animals in captivity, wild-animal temperament universally is recognized and treated as a factor of great practical importance.
Mistakes in judging the temper of dangerous animals easily lead to tragedies and sudden death.
Fundamentally the temperament of a man or an animal is an inheritance from ancestors near or remote.
In the human species a morose or hysterical temperament may possibly be corrected or improved, by education and effort.
With animals this is rarely possible.
The morose gorilla gives way to cheerfulness only when it is placed in ideally pleasant and stimulating social conditions.
This, however, very seldom is possible.
The nervous deer, bear or monkey is usually nervous to the end of its days.
The morose and hysterical temperaments operate against mental development, progress and happiness.
In the human species among individuals of equal mental calibre, the sanguine individual is due to rise higher and go farther than his nervous or lymphatic rivals.
A characteristic temperament may embrace the majority of a whole species, or be limited to a few individuals.
Many species are permanently characterized by the temperament common to the majority of their individual members.
Thus, among the great apes the gorilla species is either morose or lymphatic; and it is manifested by persistent inactivity and sullenness.
This leads to loss of appetite, indigestion, inactivity and early death.
Major Penny's "John Gorilla" was a notable exception, as will appear in Chapter IX.
The orang-utan is sanguine, optimistic and cheerful, a good boarder, affectionate toward his keepers, and friendly toward strangers.
He eats well, enjoys life, lives long, and is well liked by everybody.
Except when quite young, the chimpanzee is either nervous or hysterical.
After six years of age it is irritable and difficult to manage.
After seven years of age (puberty) it is rough, domineering and dangerous.
The male is given to shouting, yelling, shrieking and roaring, and when quite angry rages like a demon.
I know of no wild animal that is more dangerous per pound than a male chimpanzee over eight years of age.
When young they do wonders in trained performances, but when they reach maturity, grow big of arm and shoulder, and masterfully strong, they quickly become conscious of their strength.
It is then that performing chimpanzees become unruly, fly into sudden fits of temper, their back hair bristles up, they stamp violently, and sometimes leap into a terrorized orchestra.
Next in order, they are retired willy-nilly from the stage, and are offered for sale to zoological parks and gardens having facilities for confinement and control.
The baboons are characteristically fierce and aggressive, and in a wild state they live in troops, or even in herds of hundreds.
Being armed with powerful canine teeth and wolf-like jaws, they are formidable antagonists, and other animals do not dare to attack them.
It is because of their natural weapons, their readiness to fight like fiends, and their combined agility and strength that the baboons have been able to live on the ground and survive and flourish in lands literally reeking with lions, leopards, hyenas and wild dogs.
The awful canine teeth of an old male baboon are quite as dangerous as those of any leopard, and even the leopard's onslaught is less to be feared than the wild rage of an adult baboon.
In the Transvaal and Rhodesia, it is a common occurrence for an ambitious dog to go after a troop of baboons and never return.
Temperamentally the commoner groups of monkeys are thus characterized: The rhesus monkeys of India are nervous, irritable and dangerous.
The green monkeys of Africa are sanguine, but savage and treacherous.
The langur monkeys of India are sanguine and peace-loving.
The macaques of the Far East vary from the sanguine temperament to the combative.
The gibbons vary from sanguine to combative.
The lemurs of Madagascar are sanguine, affectionate and peaceful.
Nearly all South American monkeys are sanguine, and peace-loving, and many are affectionate.
The species of the group of Carnivora are too numerous and too diversified to be treated with any approach to completeness.
However, to illustrate this subject the leading species will be noticed.
TEMPERAMENTS OF THE LARGE CARNIVORES The lion is sanguine, courageous, confident, reposeful and very reliable.
The tiger is nervous, suspicious, treacherous and uncertain.
The black and common leopards are nervous and combative, irreconcilable and dangerous.
The snow leopard is sanguine, optimistic and peace-loving.
The puma is sanguine, good natured, quiet and peaceful.
The wolves are sanguine, crafty, dangerous and cruel.
The foxes are hysterical, timid and full of senseless fear.
The lynxes are sanguine, philosophic, and peaceful.
The mustelines are either nervous or hysterical, courageous, savage, and even murderous.
The bears are so very interesting that it is well worth while to consider the leading species separately.
Possibly our conclusions will reveal some unsuspected conditions.
BEAR TEMPERAMENTS, BY SPECIES.
The polar bears are sanguine, but in captivity they are courageous, treacherous and dangerous.
The Alaskan brown bears in captivity are sanguine, courageous, peaceful and reliable, but in the wilds they are aggressive and dangerous.
The grizzlies are nervous, keen, cautious, and seldom wantonly aggressive.
The European brown bears are sanguine, optimistic and good- natured.
The American black bears are sanguine and quiet, but very treacherous.
The sloth bears of India are nervous or hysterical, and uncertain.
The Malay sun bears are hysterical, aggressive and evil-tempered.
The Japanese black bears are nervous, cowardly and aggressive.
To those who form and maintain large collections of bears, involving much companionship in dens, it is necessary to keep a watchful eye on the temperament chart.
THE DEER.
In our Zoological Park establishment there is no collection in which both the collective and the individual equation is more troublesome than the deer family.
In their management, as with apes, monkeys and bears, it is necessary to take into account the temperament not only of the species, but also of each animal; and there are times when this necessity bears hard upon human nerves.
The proneness of captive deer to maim and to kill themselves and each other calls for the utmost vigilance, and for heroic endurance on the part of the deer keeper.
Even when a deer species has a fairly good record for common sense, an individual may "go crazy" the instant a slightly new situation arises.
We have seen barasingha deer penned up between shock-absorbing bales of hay seriously try to jump straight up through a roof skylight nine feet from the floor.
We have seen park-bred axis deer break their own necks against wire fences, with 100 per cent of stupidity.
CHARACTERS OF DEER SPECIES The white-tailed deer is sanguine, but in the fall the bucks are very aggressive and dangerous, and to be carefully avoided.
The mule deer is sanguine, reasonable and not particularly dangerous.
The elk is steady of nerve, and sanguine in temperament, but in the rutting season the herd-masters are dangerous.
The fallow deer species has been toned down by a hundred generations of park life, and it is very quiet, save when it is to be captured and crated.
The axis deer is nervous, flighty, and difficult to handle.
The barasingha deer is hysterical and unaccountable.
The Indian and Malay sambar deer are lymphatic, confident, tractable and easily handled.
Never keep a deer as a "pet" any longer than is necessary to place it in a good home.
All "pet deer" are dangerous, and should be confined all the time.
Never go into the range or corral of a deer herd unless accompanied by the deer-keeper; and in the rutting season do not go in at all.
The only thoroughly safe deer is a dead one; for even does can do mischief.
A SAMPLE OF NERVOUS TEMPERAMENT.
As an example of temperament in small carnivores, we will cite the coati mundi of South America.
It is one of the most nervous and restless animals we know.
An individual of sanguine temperament rarely is seen.
Out of about forty specimens with which we have been well acquainted, I do not recall one that was as quiet and phlegmatic as the raccoon, the nearest relative of _Nasua_.
With a disposition so restless and enterprising, and with such vigor of body and mind, I count it strange that the genus _Nasua_ has not spread all over our south-eastern states, where it is surely fitted to exist in a state of nature even more successfully than the raccoon or opossum.
The temper of the coati mundi is essentially quarrelsome and aggressive.
While young, they are reasonably peaceful, but when they reach adult age, they become aggressive, and quarrels are frequent.
Separations then are very necessary, and it is rare indeed that more than two adult individuals can be caged together.
Even when two only are kept together, quarrels and shrill squealings are frequent.
But they seldom hurt each other.
The coati is not a treacherous animal, it is not given to lying in wait to make a covert attack from ambush, and being almost constantly on the move, it is a good show animal.
THE STRANGE COMBATIVE TEMPERAMENT OF THE GUANACO.
In appearance the guanaco is the personification of gentleness.
Its placid countenance indicates no guile, nor means of offense.
Its lustrous gazelle-like eyes, and its soft, woolly fleece suggest softness of disposition.
But in reality no animal is more deceptive.
In a wild state amongst its own kind, or in captivity,--no matter how considerately treated,--it is a quarrelsome and at times intractable animal.
"A pair of wild guanacos can often be seen or heard engaged in desperate combat, biting and tearing, and rolling over one another on the ground, uttering their gurgling, bubbling cries of rage.
Of a pair so engaged, I shot one whose tail had then been bitten off in the encounter.
In confinement, the guanaco charges one with his chest, or rears up on his hind legs to strike one with his fore-feet, besides biting and spitting up the contents of the stomach."
--Richard Crawshay in "The Birds of Terra del Fuego."
MENTAL TRAITS AND TEMPER OF THE ATLANTIC WALRUS Mr. Langdon Gibson, of Schenectady, kindly wrote out for me the following highly interesting observations on a remarkable arctic animal with which we are but slightly acquainted: "In the summer of 1891, as a member of the first Peary Expedition I had an opportunity of observing some of the traits of the Atlantic walrus.
I found him to be a real animal, of huge size, with an extremely disagreeable temper and most belligerently inclined.
We hunted them in open whale-boats under the shadows of Greenland's mountain-bound coast, in the Whale Sound region, Lat.
77 degrees North.
"We hunted among animals never before molested, except by the Eskimo who (so far as I was able to ascertain) hunt them only during the winter season on the sea ice.
We found animals whose courage and belief in themselves and their prowess had hitherto been unshaken by contact with the white man and his ingenious devices of slaughter.
"The walrus has a steady nerve and a thoroughly convincing roar.
They have fought their kind and the elements for centuries and centuries, and know no fear.
This, then, was the animal we sought in order to secure food for our dog teams.
I can conceive of no form of big game hunting so conducive to great mental excitement and physical activity as walrus hunting from an open whale-boat.
At the completion of such a hunt I have seen Eskimo so excited and worked up that they were taken violently sick with vomiting and headache.
"The walrus is a gregarious animal, confederating in herds numbering from ten to fifty, and in some instances no doubt larger numbers may be found together.
On calm days they rest in unmolested peace on pans of broken ice which drift up and down the waters of Whale Sound.
It is unfortunate that no soundings were taken in the region where the walrus were found, as a knowledge of the depth of water would have furnished some information as to the distances to which the animal will dive in search of food.
"The stomachs of all half- and full-grown walrus taken in Whale Sound were without exception well filled with freshly opened clams, with very few fragments of shells in evidence; the removal of the clam from the shell being as neatly accomplished as though done by an expert oysterman.
"In most cases these segregated herds of walrus were in charge of a large bull who generally occupied a central position in the mass of animals.
Upon approaching such a herd for the first time, and when within about 200 feet, a large bull would lift his head, sniff audibly in our direction and give a loud grunt which apparently struck a responsive chord in the other sleeping animals.
They would grunt in unison, in more subdued tones, after which the old walrus would drop his head to resume his interrupted nap.
Their contempt for us was somewhat disconcerting.
"At the first crack of a rifle, however, the animals immediately aroused, and then during the fusillade which followed there occurred what might be called an orderly scramble for the water.
In the first place the young ones were hustled to the edge of the ice-pan, and there, apparently under the protection of the mother's flipper, pushed into the water, immediately followed by the mother.
The young bulls followed, and I recall no exceptions where the last animal into the water was not the big bull, who before diving would give our boat a wicked look and a roar of rage.
"The animals would immediately dive, and then we first became aware of a remarkable phenomenon.
We found that when excited they would continue their roaring under water, and these strange sounds coming to us from below added considerably to the excitement of the chase.
Although the cows and young animals would generally swim to places of safety, the other full grown animals would hover beneath our boat and from time to time come to the surface and charge.
These charges were in all cases repulsed by the discharge of our rifles in the faces of the animals.
The balls, however, from our .45 calibre carbines would flatten out under the skin on the massive bony structure of the animal's skull, and cause only a sort of rage and a sneeze, but it however had the effect of making them dive again.
It is my belief that when enraged the walrus if not resisted would attack and attempt to destroy a boat.
Icquah, one of our native hunters, showed me in the deck of his kyak two mended punctures which he told me were made by the tusks of a walrus that had made an _unprovoked_ attack upon him.
"On more than one occasion I have seen two strong uninjured animals come to the assistance of a wounded companion, and swim away with it to a position of safety, _the injured animal being supported on both sides_, giving the appearance of three animals swimming abreast.
The first time I witnessed this I did not comprehend its real meaning, but on another occasion in McCormick Bay I saw a wounded animal leaving a trail of blood and oil, supported on either side by two uninjured ones.
They were making a hasty retreat and would occasionally dive together, but would quickly return to the surface.
"We found the most effective exposed spot to place a bullet was at the base of the animal's skull.
A walrus instantly killed this way generally sinks, leaving a trail of blood and oil to mark the place of his descent.
When hunting these animals it is well to have an Eskimo along with harpoon and line in readiness to make fast; otherwise one is apt to lose his quarry.
"In the early winter we usually found the walrus in smaller groups up in the bays.
This was after the ice had begun to make, and in coming to the surface to breathe the animals found it necessary to butt their noses against the ice to break it.
I have seen this done in ice at least four inches in thickness.
In some instances I have seen a fractured star in the ice, a record of an unsuccessful attempt to make a breathing hole."
Around these breathing holes we frequently found fragments of clam-shells, sections of crinoids and sea-anemones.
It is evident that after raking the bottom with his tusks and filling his mouth with food, the walrus separates the food he desires to retain and rejects on his way up and at the surface such articles as he has picked up in haste and does not want.
"From the fact that the walrus is easily approached it is a simple matter to kill him with the modern high power rule.
It is therefore to be hoped that future expeditions into the arctic seas will kill sparingly of these tremendous brutes which from point of size stand in the foremost rank among mammals."
The Elephant, Rhinoceros and Hippopotamus.
_Individual Elephants_ vary in temperament far more than do rhinoceroses or hippopotami, and the variations are wide.
In a wild state, elephants are quiet and undemonstrative, almost to the point of dullness.
They do not domineer, or hector, or quarrel, save when a rogue develops in the ranks, and sets out to make things interesting by the commission of lawless acts.
A professional rogue is about everything that an orthodox elephant should not be, and he soon makes of himself so great a nuisance that he is driven out of the herd.
The temperament of the standardized and normal elephant is distinctly sanguine, _but a nervous or hysterical individual is easily developed by bad conditions or abuse_.
Adult male elephants are subject to various degrees of what we may as well call sexual insanity, which is dangerous in direct proportion to its intensity.
This causes many a "bad" show elephant to be presented to a zoological garden, where the dangers of this mental condition can at least be reduced to their lowest terms.
Our Indian elephant who was known as Gunda was afflicted with sexual insanity, and he gradually grew worse, and increasingly dangerous to his keepers, until finally it was necessary to end his troubles painlessly with a bullet through his brain.
_The Rhinoceros_ is a sanguine animal, of rather dull vision and slow understanding.
In captivity it gives little trouble, and lives long.
Adults individually often become pettish, or peevish, and threaten to prod their keepers without cause, but I have never known a keeper to take those lapses seriously.
The average rhino is by no means a dull or a stupid animal, and they have quite enough life to make themselves interesting to visitors.
In British East Africa a black rhinoceros often trots briskly toward a caravan, and seems to be charging, when in reality it is only desiring a "close-up" to satisfy its legitimate curiosity.
_Every Hippopotamus_, either Nile or pygmy, is an animal of serene mind and steady habits.
Their appetites work with clock- like regularity, and require no winding.
I can not recall that any one of our five hippos was ever sick for a day, or missed a meal.
When the idiosyncrasies of Gunda, our bad elephant, were at their worst, the contemplation of Peter the Great ponderously and serenely chewing his hay was a rest to tired nerves.
Keeper Thuman treats the four pygmy hippos like so many pet pigs,--save the solitary adult male, who sets himself up to be peevish.
The breeding female is a wise and good mother, with much more maternal instinct than our chimpanzee "Suzette."
It may be set down as an absolute rule that hippos are lymphatic, easy-going, contented, and easy to take care of _provided_ they are kept scrupulously clean, and are fed as they should be fed.
They live long, breed persistently, give no trouble and have high exhibition value.
_Giraffe_ individuals vary exceedingly,--beyond all other hoofed animals.
Each one has its own headful of notions, and rarely will two be found quite alike in temperament and views of life.
Some are sanguine and sensible, others are nervous, crotchety, and full of senseless fears.
Those who are responsible for them in captivity are constantly harassed by fears that they will stampede in their stalls or yards, and break their own necks and legs in most unexpected ways.
They require greater vigilance than any other hoofed animals we know.
Sometimes a giraffe will develop foolishness to such a degree as to be unwilling to go out of its own huge door, into a shady and comfortable yard.
III THE LANGUAGE OF WILD ANIMALS Language is the means by which men and animals express their thoughts.
Of language there are four kinds: vocal, pictured, written and sign language.
Any vocal sound uttered for the purpose of conveying thought, or influencing thought or action, is to be classed as vocal language.
Among the mammals below man, _speech_ is totally absent; but parrots, macaws, cockatoos and crows have been taught to imitate the sound of man's words, or certain simple kinds of music.
The primitive races of mankind first employed the sign language, and spoken words.
After that comes picture language, and lastly the language of written words.
Among the Indians and frontiersmen of the western United States and Canada, the sign language has reached what in all probability is its highest development, and its vocabulary is really wonderful.
The higher wild animals express their thoughts and feelings usually by sign language, and rarely by vocal sounds.
Their power of expression varies species by species, or tribe by tribe, quite as it does among the races and tribes of men.
It is our belief that there are today several living races of men whose vocabularies are limited to about 300 words.
Very many species of animals appear to be voiceless; but it is hazardous to attempt to specify the species.
Sometimes under stress of new emergencies, or great pain, animals that have been considered voiceless suddenly give tongue.
That hundreds of species of mammals and birds use their voices in promoting movements for their safety, there is no room to doubt.
The only question is of the methods and the extent of voice used.
Birds and men give expression to their pleasure or joy by singing.
In the jungle and the heavily wooded wilderness, one hears really little of vocal wild-animal language.
Through countless generations the noisiest animals have been the first ones to be sought out and killed by their enemies, and only the more silent species have survived.
All the higher animals, as we call the higher vertebrates, have the ability to exchange thoughts and convey ideas; and that is language.
At the threshold of this subject we are met by two interesting facts.
Excepting the song-birds, the wild creatures of today have learned through instinct and accumulated experience that silence promotes peace and long life.
The bull moose who bawls through a mile of forest, and the bull elk who bugles not wisely but too well, soon find their heads hanging in some sportsman's dining- room, while the silent Virginia deer, like the brook, goes on forever.
Association with man through countless generations has taught domestic animals not only the fact of their safety when giving voice, but also that very often there is great virtue in a vigorous outcry.
With an insistent staccato neigh, the hungry horse jars the dull brain of its laggard master, and prompts him to "feed and water the stock."
But how different is the cry of a lost horse, which calls for rescue.
It cannot be imitated in printed words; but every plainsman knows the shrill and prolonged trumpet-call of distress that can be heard a mile or more, understandingly.
And think of the vocabulary of the domestic chicken!
Years of life in fancied security have developed a highly useful vocabulary of language calls and cries.
The most important, and the best known, are the following: "Beware the hawk!"--"Coor!
Coor!"
"Murder!
Help!"
--"Kee- _owk_!
Kee-_owk_!
Kee-_owk_!"
"Come on"--"Cluck!
Cluck!
Cluck!"
"Food here!
Food!"--"Cook-cook-cook-cook!"
Announcement, or alarm--"Cut-cut-cut-_dah_-cut!"
But does the wild jungle-fowl, the ancestor of our domestic chicken, indulge in all those noisy expressions of thought and feeling?
By no means.
I have lived for months in jungles where my hut was surrounded by jungle-fowl, and shot many of them for my table; but the only vocal sound I ever heard from their small throats was the absurdly shrill bantam-like crow of the cock.
And even that led to several fatalities in the ranks of _Gallus stanleyi_.
Domestic cattle, swine and fowls have each a language of their own, and as far as they go they are almost as clear-cut and understandable as the talk of human beings.
Just how much more is behind the veil that limits our understanding we cannot say; but no doubt there is a great deal.
But it is with the language of wild animals that we are most concerned.
As already pointed out, wild creatures, other than song-birds, do not care to say much, because of the danger of attracting enemies that will exterminate them.
Herein lies the extreme difficulty of ascertaining how wild beasts communicate.
In the Animallai Hills of southern India I hunted constantly for many weeks through forests actually teeming with big game.
There were herds upon herds of elephants, gaur, axis deer, sambar deer, monkeys by the hundred, and a good sprinkling of bears, wild hogs and tigers.
We saw hundreds upon hundreds of animals; but with the exception of the big black monkeys that used to swear at us, I can almost count upon my fingers the whole number of times that we heard animals raise their voices to communicate with each other.
Ape Voices.
Naturally it is of interest to know something of the voices of the animals that physically and mentally stand nearest to man.
The wild gorilla has a voice almost equal to that of the chimpanzee, but in captivity he rarely utters any vocal sound other than a shriek, or scream.
The baby orang-utan either whines or shrieks like a human child.
The half-grown or adult orang when profoundly excited bellows or roars, in a deep bass voice.
Usually, however, it is a persistently silent animal.
The chimpanzee has a voice, and vociferously expresses its emotions.
First and most often is the plaintive, coaxing note, "Who'-oo!
who'-oo!
who'-oo!"
Then comes the angry and threatening, "Wah', wah', wah-!
_Wah'_-hool _Wah'_-hool" Lastly we hear the fearful, high-pitched yell or shriek, "Ah-h-h- h!"
or "E-e-e-e." The shriek, or scream, can be heard half a mile, and at close range it is literally ear-splitting.
Usually it is accompanied by violent stamping or pounding with the feet upon the floor.
It may signify rage, or nothing more than the joy of living, and of having a place in which to yell.
It is this cry that is uncannily human-like in sound, and when heard for the first time it seems to register anguish.
In its Bornean jungle home, the orang-utan is nearly as silent as the grave.
Never save once did I hear one utter a vocal sound.
That was a deep bass roar emitted by an old male that I disturbed while he was sleeping on the comfortable nest of green branches that he had built for himself.
Concerning the chimpanzee, the late Mr. Richard L. Garner testified as follows: "Not only does the chimpanzee often break the silence of the forest when all other voices are hushed, but he frequently answers the sounds of other animals, as if in mockery or defiance.
...
Although diurnal in habit, the chimpanzees often make the night reverberate with the sounds of their terrific screaming, which I have known them to continue at times for more than an hour, with scarcely a moment's pause,--not one voice but many, and within the area of a square mile or so I have distinguished as many as seven alternating adult male voices.
"The gorilla is more silent and stoical than the chimpanzee, but he is far from being mute.
He appears to be devoid of all risibility, but he is often very noisy.
Although diurnal in habit, he talks less frequently during the day than at night, but his silence is a natural consequence of his stealth and cunning.
There are times, however, when he ignores all danger of betraying his whereabouts or his movements, and gives vent to a deluge of speech.
At night his screams and shouts are terrific."
The gibbons (including the siamang) have tremendous voices, with numerous variations, and they love to use them.
My acquaintance with them began in Borneo, in the dense and dark coastal forest that there forms their home.
I remember their cries as vividly as if I had heard them again this morning.
While feeding, or quietly enjoying the morning sun, the gray gibbon (_Hylobates concolor_) emits in leisurely succession a low staccato, whistle-like cry, like "Hoot!
Hoot!
Hoot!"
which one can easily counterfeit by whistling.
This is varied by another whistle cry of three notes, thus: "Who-ee-hoo!
Who-ee-hoo!"
also to be duplicated by whistling.
In hunting for specimens of that gibbon, for American museums, I could rarely locate a troop save by the tree- top talk of its members.
But all this was only childish prattle in comparison with the daily performances of the big white-handed, and the black hoolock gibbons, now and for several years past residing in our Primate House.
Every morning, and perhaps a dozen times during the day, those three gibbons go on a vocal rampage and utter prolonged and ear-splitting cries and shrieks that make the welkin ring.
The shrieking chorus is usually prolonged until it becomes tiresome to the monkeys.
In all our ape and monkey experience we never have known its equal save in the vocal performances of Boma, our big adult male chimpanzee, the husband of Suzette.
A baboon emits occasionally, and without any warning, a fearful explosive bark, or roar, that to visitors is as startling as the report of a gun.
The commonest expressions are "Wah!"
and "_Wah'_-hoo!
", and the visitor who can hear it close at hand without jumping has good nerves.
The big and solemn long-nosed monkey of Borneo (_Nasalis larvatus_) utters in his native tree-top (overhanging water), a cry like the resonant "honk" of a saxophone.
He says plainly, "Kee honk," and all that I could make of its meaning was that it is used as the equivalent of "All's well."
Of all the monkeys that I have ever known, either wild or in captivity, the red howlers of the Orinoco, in Venezuela, have the most remarkable voices, and make the most remarkable use of them.
The hyoid cartilage is expanded,--for Nature's own particular reasons,--into a wonderful sound-box, as big as an English walnut, which gives to the adult voice a depth of pitch and a booming resonance that is impossible to describe.
The note produced is a prolonged bass roar, in alternately rising and falling cadence, and in reality comprising about three notes.
It is the habit of troops of red howlers to indulge in nocturnal concerts, wherein four, five or six old males will pipe up and begin to howl in unison.
The great volume of uncanny sound thus produced goes rolling through the still forest, far and wide; and to the white explorer who lies in his grass hammock in pitchy darkness, fighting off the mosquitoes and loneliness, and wondering from whence tomorrow's meals will come, the moral effect is gruesome and depressing.
In captivity the youthful howler habitually growls and grumbles in a way that is highly amusing, and the absurd pitch of the deep bass voice issuing from so small an animal is cause for wonder.
It is natural that we should look closely to the apes and monkeys for language, both by voice and sign.
In 1891 there was a flood of talk on "the speech of monkeys," and it was not until about 1904 that the torrent stopped.
At first the knowledge that monkeys can and do communicate to a limited extent by vocal sounds was hailed as a "discovery"; but unfortunately for science, nothing has been proved beyond the long-known fact that primates of a given species understand the meaning of the few sounds and cries to which their kind give utterance.
Thus far I have never succeeded in teaching a chimpanzee or orangutan to say even as much as "Oh" or "Ah."
Nothing seems to be further from the mind of an orang than the idea of a new vocal utterance as a means to an end.
Our Polly was the most affectionate and demonstrative chimpanzee that I have ever seen, and her reaction to my voice was the best that I have found in our many apes.
She knew me well, and when I greeted her in her own language, usually she answered me promptly and vociferously.
Often when she had been busy with her physical- culture exercises and Delsartean movements on the horizontal bars or the trapeze in the centre of her big cage, I tested her by quietly joining the crowd of visitors in the centre of the room before her cage, and saying to her: "Polly!
Wah!
Wah!
Wah!"
Nearly every time she would stop short, give instant attention and joyously respond "Wah!
Wah!
Wah!
", repeating the cry a dozen times while she clambered down to the lower front bars to reach me with her hands.
When particularly excited she would cry "_Who_-oo!
_Who_-oo!
_Who_-oo!"
with great clearness and vehemence, the two syllables pitched four notes apart.
This cry was uttered as a joyous greeting, and also at feeding-time, in expectation of food; but, simple as the task seems to be, I really do not know how to translate its meaning into English.
In one case it appears to mean "How do you do?"
and in the other it seems to stand for "Hurry up!"
Polly screamed when angry or grieved, just like a naughty child; and her face assumed the extreme of screaming-child expression.
She whined plaintively when coaxing, or when only slightly grieved.
With these four manifestations her vocal powers seemed to stop short.
Many times I opened her mouth widely with my fingers, and tried to surprise her into saying "Ah," but with no result.
It seems almost impossible to stamp the vocal-sound idea upon the mind of an orang-utan or chimpanzee.
Polly uttered two distinct and clearly cut syllables, and it really seemed as if her vocal organs could have done more if called upon.
The cries of the monkeys, baboons and lemurs are practically nothing more than squeals, shrieks or roars.
The baboons (several species, at least) bark or roar most explosively, using the syllable "Wah!"
It is only by the most liberal interpretation of terms that such cries can be called language.
The majority express only two emotions--dissatisfaction and expectation.
Every primate calls for help in the same way that human beings do, by shrill screaming; but none of them ever cry "Oh" or "Ah."
The only members of the monkey tribe who ever spoke to me in their native forests were the big black langurs of the Animallai Hills in Southern India.
They used to glare down at us, and curse us horribly whenever we met.
Had we been big pythons instead of men they could not have said "Confound you!"
any more plainly or more vehemently than they did.
In those museum-making days our motto was "All's fish that cometh to net"; and we killed monkeys for their skins and skeletons the same as other animals.
My brown-skinned Mulcer hunters said that the bandarlog hated me because of my white skin.
At all events, as we stalked silently through those forests, half a dozen times a day we would hear an awful explosion overhead, startling to men who were still-hunting big game, and from the middle zone of the tree-tops black and angry faces would peer down at us.
They said: "Wah!
Wah!
Wah!
Ah-^oo-oo-Aoo-oo-^oo-oo!"
and it was nothing else than cursing and blackguarding.
How those monkeys did hate us!
I never have encountered elsewhere anything like it in monkey-land.
la 1902 there was a startling exhibition of monkey language at our Primate House.
That was before the completion of the Lion House.
We had to find temporary outdoor quarters for the big jaguar, "Senor Lopez"; and there being nothing else available, we decided to place him, for a few days only, in the big circular cage at the north end of the range of outside cages.
It was May, and the baboons, red-faced monkeys, rhesus, green and many other of the monkeys were in their outside quarters.
I was not present when Lopez was turned into the big: cage; but I heard it.
Down through the woods to the polar bears' den, a good quarter of a mile, came a most awful uproar, made by many voices.
The bulk of it was a medley of raucous yells and screeches, above which it was easy to distinguish the fierce, dog-like barks and roars of the baboons.
We knew at once that Lopez had arrived.
Hurrying up to the Primate House, we found the wire fronts of the outside cages literally plastered with monkeys and baboons, all in the wildest excitement.
The jaguar was in full view of them, and although not one out of the whole lot, except the sapajous, ever had an ancestor who had seen a jaguar, one and all recognized a hostile genus, and a hereditary enemy.
And how they cursed him, reviled him, and made hideous faces at him!
The long-armed yellow baboons barked and roared until they were heard half a mile away.
The ugly-tempered macaques and rhesus monkeys nearly burst with hatred and indignation.
The row was kept up for a long time, and the monkey language that was lost to science on that occasion was, both in quantity and quality, beyond compare.
Bear Language.
In their native haunts bears are as little given to loud talk as other animals; but in roomy and comfortable captivity, where many are yarded together, they rapidly develop vocal powers.
Our bears are such cheerful citizens, and they do so many droll things, that the average visitor works overtime in watching them.
I have learned the language of our bears sufficiently that whenever I hear one of them give tongue I know what he says.
For example: In warning or threatening an enemy, the sloth bear says: "Ach!
Ach!
Ach!"
and the grizzly says: "Woof!
Woof!"
A fighting bear says: "Aw-aw-aw!"
A baby's call for its mother is "Row!
Row!"
A bear's distress call is: "Err-_wow_-oo-oo-oof!"
But even in a zoological park it is not possible for everyone to recognize and interpret the different cries of bears, although the ability to do so is sometimes of value to the party of the second part.
For example: One day in February I was sitting in my old office in the Service Building, engrossed in I know not what important and solemn matter.
The park was quiet; for the snow lay nine inches deep over all.
There were no visitors, and the maintenance men were silently shovelling.
Over the hill from the bear dens came the voice of a bear.
It said, as plainly as print: "Err-wow!"
I said to myself: "That sounds like a distress call," and listened to hear it repeated.
Again it came: "Err-wow!"
I caught up my hat and hastened over the hill toward the bear dens.
On the broad concrete walk, about a hundred feet from the dens, four men were industriously shovelling snow, unaware that anything was wrong anywhere except on the pay-roll, opposite their names.
Guided by the cries that came from "The Nursery" den, where six yearling cubs were kept, I quickly caught sight of the trouble.
One of our park-born brown bear cubs was hanging fast by one forefoot from the top of the barred partition.
He had climbed to the top of the ironwork, thrust one front paw through between two of the bars (for bears are the greatest busybodies on earth), and when he sought to withdraw it, the sharp point of a bar in the overhang of the tree-guard had buried itself in the back of his paw, and held him fast.
It seemed as if his leg was broken, and also dislocated at the shoulder.
No wonder the poor little chap squalled for help.
His mother, on the other side of the partition, was almost frantic with baffled sympathy, for she could do nothing to help him.
It did not take more than a quarter of a minute to have several men running for crowbars and other things, and within five minutes from the discovery we were in the den ready for action.
The little chap gave two or three cries to let us know how badly it hurt his leg to hang there, then bent his small mind upon rendering us assistance.
First we lifted him up bodily, and held him, to remove the strain.
Then, by good luck, we had at hand a stout iron bar with a U- shaped end; and with that under the injured wrist, and a crowbar to spring the treacherous overhang, we lifted the foot clear, and lowered little Brownie to the floor.
From first to last he helped us all he could, and seemed to realize that it was clearly "no fair" to bite or scratch.
Fortunately the leg was neither broken nor dislocated, and although Brownie limped for ten days, he soon was all right again.
After the incident had been closed, I gave the men a brief lecture on the language of bears, and the necessity of being able to recognize the distress call.
You can chase bison, elephants and deer all day without hearing a single vocal utterance.
They know through long experience the value of silence.
The night after I shot my second elephant we noted an exception.
The herd had been divided by our onslaught.
Part of it had gone north, part of it south, and our camp for the night (beside the dead tusker) lay midway between the two.
About bedtime the elephants began signalling to each other by trumpeting, and what they sounded was "The assembly."
They called and answered repeatedly; and finally it became clear to my native followers that the two herds were advancing to unite, and were likely to meet in our vicinity.
That particular trumpet call was different from any other I have ever heard.
It was a regular "Hello" signal- call, entirely different from the "Tal-_loo_-e" blast which once came from a feeding herd and guided us to it.
But it is only on rare occasions that elephants communicate with each other by sound.
I once knew a general alarm to be communicated throughout a large herd by the sign language, and a retreat organized and carried out in absolute silence.
Their danger signals to each other must have been made with their trunks and their ears; but we saw none of them, because all the animals were concealed from our view except when the two scouts of the herd were hunting for us.
In captivity an elephant trumpets in protest, or through fear, or through rage; but I am obliged to confess that as yet I cannot positively distinguish one from the other.
Once in the Zoological Park I heard our troublesome Indian elephant, Alice, roaring continuously as if in pain.
It continued at such a rate that I hurried over to the Elephant House to investigate.
And there I saw a droll spectacle.
Keeper Richards had taken Alice out into her yard for exercise and had ordered her to follow him.
And there he was disgustedly marching around the yard while Alice marched after him at an interval of ten paces, quite free and untrammeled, but all the while lustily trumpeting and roaring in indignant protest.
The only point at which she was hurt was in her feelings.
Two questions that came into public notice concerning the voices of two important American animals have been permanently settled by "the barnyard naturalists" of New York.
The Voice of the American Bison.
In 1907 the statement of George Catlin, to the effect that in the fall the bellowing of buffalo bulls on the plains resembled the muttering of distant thunder, was denied and severely criticized in a sportsman's magazine.
On October 4 of that year, while we were selecting the fifteen bison to be presented to the Government, to found the Wichita National Bison Herd, four of us heard our best bull _bellow_ five times, while another did the same thing four times.
The sound uttered was a deep-voiced roar,--not a grunt,--rising and falling in measured cadence, and prolonged about four or five seconds.
It was totally different from the ordinary grunt of hunger, or the menace of an angry buffalo, which is short and sharp.
In discussing the quality of the bellow, we agreed that it could properly be called a low roar.
It is heard only in the rutting season,--the period described by Catlin,--and there is good reason to believe that Caitlin's description is perfectly correct.
The Scream of the Puma.
This is a subject that will not lie still.
I presume it will recur every five years as long as pumas endure.
Uncountable pages of controversial letters have been expended upon the question: "Does the puma ever scream, like a woman in distress?"
The true answer is easy, and uncontestable by people whose minds are open to the rules of evidence.
Yes; the adult female puma DOES scream,-_in the mating season_, whenever it comes.
It is loud, piercing, prolonged, and has the agonized voice qualities of a boy or a woman screaming from the pain of a surgical operation.
To one who does not know the source or the cause, it is nerve-racking.
When heard in a remote wilderness it must be truly fearsome.
It says "Ow-w-w-w!"
over and over.
We have heard it a hundred times or more, and it easily carries a quarter of a mile.
The language of animals is a long and interesting subject,--so much so that here it is possible only to sketch out and suggest its foundations and scope.
On birds alone, an entire volume should be written; but animal intelligence is a subject as far reaching as the winds of the earth.
No man who ever saw high in the heavens a V-shaped flock of wild geese, or heard the honk language either afloat, ashore or in the air, will deny the spoken language of that species.
If any one should do so, let him listen to the wild-goose wonder tales of Jack Miner, and hear him imitate (to perfection) the honk call of the gander at his pond, calling to wild flocks in the sky and telling them about the corn and safety down where he is.
The woodpecker drums on the high and dry limb of a dead tree his resounding signal-call that is nothing more nor less (in our view) than so much sign language.
It was many years ago that we first heard in the welcome days of early spring the resounding _"Boo-hoo-hoo"_ courting call of the cock pinnated grouse, rolling over the moist earth for a mile or more in words too plain to be misunderstood.
The American magpie talks beautifully; but I regret to say that I do not understand a word of its language.
One summer we had several fine specimens in the great flying-cage, with the big and showy waterfowl, condor, griffon vulture, ravens and crows.
One of those magpies often came over to the side of the cage to talk to me, and as I believe, make complaints.
Whether he complained about his big and bulky cagemates, or the keepers, or me, I could not tell; but I thought that his grievances were against the large birds.
Whenever I climbed over the guard rail and stooped down, he would come close up to the wire, stand in one spot, and in a quiet, confidential tone talk to me earnestly and gesticulate with his head for five minutes straight.
I have heard senile old men run on in low-voiced, unintelligible clack in precisely the same way.
The modulations of that bird's voice, its inflections and its vocabulary were wonderful.
From his manner a messenger from Mars might easily have inferred that the bird believed that every word of the discourse was fully understood.
The lion roars, magnificently.
The hyena "laughs"; the gray wolf gives a mournful howl, the coyote barks and howls, and the fox yaps.
The elk bugles, the moose roars and bawls, in desire or defiance.
The elephant trumpets or screams in the joy of good feeding, or in fear or rage; and it also rumbles deeply away down in its throat.
The red squirrel barks and chatters, usually to scold some one whom he hates, but other small rodents know that silence is golden.
The birds have the best voices of all creatures.
They are the sweet singers of the animal world, and to the inquiring mind that field is a wonderland.
The frogs are vociferous; and now if they were more silent they would last longer.
Of all the reptiles known to me, only two utter vocal sounds,--the alligator and the elephant tortoise.
The former roars or bellows, the latter grunts.
IV THE MOST INTELLIGENT ANIMALS To the professional animal-man, year in and year out comes the eternal question, "Which are the most intelligent animals?"
The question is entirely legitimate.
What animals are the best exponents of animal intelligence?
It seems to me that the numerous factors involved, and the comparisons that must be made, can best be expressed in figures.
Opinions that are based upon only one or two sets of facts are not worth much.
There are about ten factors to be taken into account and appraised separately.
In order to express many opinions in a small amount of space, we submit a table of estimates and summaries, covering a few mammalian species that are representative of many.
But, try as they will, it is not likely that any two animal men will set down the same estimates.
It all depends upon the wealth or the poverty of first-hand, eye-witness evidence.
When we enter the field of evidence that must stand in quotation marks, we cease to know where we will come out.
We desire to state that nearly all of the figures in the attached table of estimates are based upon the author's own observations, made during a period of more than forty years of ups and downs with wild animals.
ESTIMATES OF THE COMPARATIVE INTELLIGENCE AND ABILITY OF CERTAIN CONSPICUOUS WILD ANIMALS, BASED UPON KNOWN PERFORMANCES, OR THE ABSENCE OF THEM.
[Footnote: To the author, correspondence regarding the reasons for these estimates is impossible.]
[beginning of chart] Perfection in all=100 [list of categories below are written vertically above the columns, with the last column unnamed and representing a total score of animal intelligence/1000] Hereditary Knowledge Perceptive Faculties Original Thought Memory Reason Receptivity in Training Efficiency in Execution Nervous Energy Keenness of the Senses Use of the Voice Primates Chimpanzee .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.100 100 100 100 75 100 100 100 100 50 925  Orang-Utan .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.100 100 100 75 100 75 100 75 100 25 850  Gorilla.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.50 50 50 50 75 25 25 50 100 25 500 Ungulates Indian Elephant .
.
.
.
.
.100 100 100 100 100 100 100 75 50 25 850 Rhinoceros.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.25 25 25 25 25 0 0 25 25 0 175  Giraffe .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.50 25 25 25 25 25 0 25 100 0 300  White-Tailed Deer .
.
.100 100 100 25 50 0  0 100 100 0 575  Big-Horn Sheep .
.
.
.
.
.100 100 50 25 50 0 0 100 100 0 525  Mountain Goat.
.
.
.
.
.
.100 100 100 25 100 0  0 100 100 0 625  Domestic Horse.
.
.
.
.
.100 100 100 75 75 75 75 100 100 50 850 Carnivores Lion .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.100 100 50 75 50  75 50 100 100 25 725  Tiger .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.100 75 50 50 50 25 25 100 100 0 575  Grizzly Bear .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.100 100 50 25 50  75 50 75 100 25 725  Brown Bear (European)100 100 50 25 50 75 50 75 100 25 650 Gray Wolf .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
100 100 100 25 75 00 100 100 25 625  Coyote .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
100 75 50 25 50 0 0 75 100 25 500  Red Fox .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
100 100 50 75 100 0 0 100 100 25 650  Domestic Dog .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.50 100 75 75 75 75 100 100 100 100 850  Wolverine .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.100 100 100 25 100 0 75 100 100 0 700 Beaver .
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.100 100 100 25 100  0 100 100 100 0 725 According to the author's information and belief, _these are "the most intelligent" animals:_ The Chimpanzee is the most intelligent of all animals below man.
His mind approaches most closely to that of man, and it carries him farthest upward toward the human level.
He can learn more by training, and learn more easily, than any other animal.
The Orang-Utan is mentally next to the chimpanzee.
The Indian Elephant in mental capacity is third from man.
The high-class domestic Horse is a very wise and capable animal; but this is chiefly due to its age-long association with man, and education by him.
Mentally the wild horse is a very different animal, and in the intellectual scale it ranks with the deer and antelopes.
The Beaver manifests, in domestic economy, more intelligence, mechanical skill and reasoning power than any other wild animal.
The Lion is endowed with keen perceptive faculties, reasoning ability and judgment of a high order, and its mind is surprisingly receptive.
The Grizzly Bear is believed to be the wisest of all bears.
The Pack Rat (_Neotona_) is the intellectual phenomenon of the great group of gnawing animals.
It is in a class by itself.
The White Mountain Goat seems to be the wisest of all the mountain summit animals whose habits are known to zoologists and sportsmen.
A high-class Dog is the animal that mentally is in closest touch with the mind, the feelings and the impulses of man; and it is the only one that can read a man's feelings from his eyes and his facial expression.
The Marvelous Beaver.
Let us consider this animal as an illuminating example of high-power intelligence.
In domestic economy the beaver is the most intelligent of all living mammals.
His inherited knowledge, his original thought, his reasoning power and his engineering and mechanical skill in constructive works are marvelous and beyond compare.
In his manifold industrial activities, there is no other mammal that is even a good second to him.
He builds dams both great and small, to provide water in which to live, to store food and to escape from his enemies.
He builds air-tight houses of sticks and mud, either as islands, or on the shore.
When he cannot live as a pond-beaver with a house he cheerfully becomes a river-beaver.
He lives in a river-bank burrow when house-building in a pond is impossible; and he will cheerfully tunnel under a stone wall from one-pond monotony, to go exploring outside.
[Illustration: CHRISTMAS AT THE PRIMATES' HOUSE Chimpanzees (with large ears) and orang-utans (small ears).
The animal on the extreme right is an orang of the common caste] He cuts down trees, both small and large, and he makes them fall as he wishes them to fall.
He trims off all branches, and leaves no "slash" to cumber the ground.
He buries green branches, in great quantity, in the mud at the bottom of his pond, so that in winter he can get at them under a foot of solid ice.
He digs canals, of any length he pleases, to float logs and billets of wood from hinterland to pond.
If you are locating beavers in your own zoo, and are wise, you can induce beavers to build their dam where you wish it to be.
This is how we did it!
We dug out a pond of mud in order that the beavers might have a pond of water; and we wished the beavers to build a dam forty feet long, at a point about thirty feet from the iron fence where the brook ran out.
On thinking it over we concluded that we could manage it by showing the animals where we wished them to go to work.
We set a l2-inch plank on its edge, all the way across the dam site, and pegged it down.
Above it the water soon formed a little pool and began to flow over the top edge in a very miniature waterfall.
Then we turned loose four beavers and left them.
The next morning we found a cart-load of sticks and fresh mud placed like a dam against the iron fence.
In beaver language this said to us: "We would rather build our dam here,--if you don't mind.
It will be easier for us, and quicker."
We removed all their material; and in our language that action said: "No; we would rather have you build over the plank."
The next night more mud and sticks piled against the fence said to us, "We really _insist_ upon building it here!"
We made a second clearance of their materials, saying in effect: "You _shall not_ build against the fence!
You _must_ build where we tell you!"
Thereupon, the beavers began to build over the plank, saying, "Oh, well, if you are going to make a fuss about it, we will let you have your way."
So they built a beautiful water-tight dam precisely where we suggested it to them, and after that our only trouble was to keep them from overdoing the matter, and flooding the whole valley.
I am not going to dwell upon the mind and manners of the beaver.
The animal is well known.
Three excellent books have been written and pictured about him, in the language that the General Reader understands.
They are as follows: "The American Beaver and His Works," Lewis H. Morgan (1868); "The Romance of the Beaver," A. R. Dugmore (no date); "History and Traditions of the Canada Beaver," H. T. Martin (1892).
"Clever Hans," the "Thinking Horse."
From 1906 to 1910 the world read much about a wonderful educated horse owned and educated by Herr von Osten, in Germany.
The German scientists who first came in touch with "Hans" were quite bowled over by the discovery that that one horse could "think."
The _Review of Reviews_ said, in 1910: "It may be recalled that Clever Hans knew figures and letters, colors and tones, the calendar and the dial, that he could count and read, deal with decimals and fractions, spell out answers to questions with his right hoof, and recognize people from having seen their photographs.
In every case his 'replies' were given in the form of scrapings with his right forehoof.
"Whether the questioner was von Osten, who had worked with him for seven years, or a man like Schillings, who was a complete stranger, seemed immaterial; and this went farthest, perhaps, in disposing of all talk of 'collusion' between master and beast."
Now, by the bald records of the case the fact was fixed for all time that Hans was the most wonderful mental prodigy that ever bore the form of a four-footed animal.
His learning and his performances were astounding, and even uncanny.
I do not care how he was trained, nor by what process he received ideas and reacted to them!
He was a phenomenon, and I doubt whether this world ever sees his like again.
His mastery of figures alone, no matter how it was wrought, was enough to make any animal or trainer illustrious.
But eventually Clever Hans came to grief.
He was ostensibly thrown off his pedestal, in Germany, by human jealousy and egotism.
Several industrious German scientists deliberately set to work to discredit him, and they stuck to it until they accomplished that task.
The chief instrument in this was no less a man than the director of the "Psychological Institute" of the Berlin University, Professor Otto Pfungst.
He found that when Hans was put on the witness stand and subjected to rigid cross examinations _by strangers_, his answers were due partly to _telepathy and hypnotic influence_!
For example, the discovery was made that Hans could not always give the correct answer to a problem in figures unless it was known to the questioner himself.
To Hans's inquisitors this discovery imparted a terrible shock.
It did not look like "thinking" after all!
The mental process was _different_ from the process of the German mind!
The wonderful fact that Hans could remember and recognize and _reproduce_ the ten digits was entirely lost to view.
At once a shout went up all over Germany,--in the scientific circle, that Hans was an "impostor," that he could not "think," and that his mind was nothing much after all.
Poor Hans!
The glory that should have been his, and imperishable, is gone.
He was the victim of scientists of one idea, who had no sense of proportion.
He truly WAS a thinking horse; and we are sure that there are millions of men whose minds could not be developed to the point that the mind of that "dumb" animal attained,--no, not even with the aid of hypnotism and telepathy.
The bare fact that a horse _can_ be influenced by occult mental powers proves the close parallelism that exists between the brains of men and beasts.
The Trap-Door Spider.
Let no one suppose for one moment that animal mind and intelligence is limited to the brain-bearing vertebrates.
The scope and activity of the notochord in some of the invertebrates present phenomena far more wonderful per capita than many a brain produces.
Interesting books have been written, and more will be written hereafter, on the minds and doings of ants, bees, wasps, spiders and other insects.
Consider the ways and means of the ant-lion of the East, and the trap-door spider of the western desert regions.
As one object lesson from the insect world, I will flash upon the screen, for a moment only, the trap-door spider.
This wonderful insect personage has been exhaustively studied by Mr. Raymond L. Ditmars, in the development of a series of moving pictures, and at my request he has contributed the following graphic description of this spider's wonderful work.
"The trap-door spiders, inhabiting the warmer portions of both the Old and New Worlds, dig a deep tunnel in the soil, line this with a silken wallpaper, then construct a hinged door at the top so perfectly fitted and camouflaged with soil, that when it is closed there is no indication of the burrow.
Moreover, the inside portion of the door of some species is so constructed that it may be "latched," there being two holes near the edge, precisely placed where the curved fangs may be inserted and the door held firmly closed.
Also, the trap-door of a number of species is so designed as to be absolutely rain-proof, being bevelled and as accurately fitting a corresponding bevel of the tube as the setting of a compression valve of a gasolene engine.
[Illustration: THE TRAP-DOOR SPIDER'S DOOR AND BURROW By R. L. Ditmars 1.
The door closed.
Its top carefully counterfeits the surrounding ground.
2.
The door with silken hinge, held open by a needle.
3.
The spider in its doorway, looking for prey.
4.
Section of the burrow and trap- door.]
"The study of a number of specimens of our southern California species, which builds the cork-type door, including observations of them at night, when they are particularly active, indicates that the construction of the tube involves other material than the silken lining employed by many burrowing spiders.
In the excavation of the tube and retention of the walls, the spider appears to employ a glairy substance, which thoroughly saturates the soil and renders the interior of the tube of almost cement- like hardness.
It is then plastered with a thick jet of silk from the spinning glands.
This interior finishing process appears to be quite rapid, a burrow being readily lined within a couple of hours.
"The construction of the trap-door is a far more complicated process, this convex, beautifully bevelled entrance with its hinge requiring real scientific skill.
Judging from observations on a number of specimens, the work is done from the outside, the spider first spinning a net-like covering over the mouth of the tube.
This is thickened by weaving the body over the net, each motion leaving a smoky trail of silk.
Earth is then shoveled into the covering, the spider carefully pushing the particles toward the centre, which soon sags, and assumes the proper curvature, and automatically moulds against the bevelled walls of the tube.
"The shoveling process must be nicely regulated to produce the proper bevel and thickness of the door.
Then the cementing process is applied to the top, rendering the door a solid unit.
From the actions of these spiders,--which often calmly rest an hour without a move,--it appears that the edges of the door are now subjected, by the stout and sharp fangs, to a cutting process like that of a can opener, leaving a portion of the marginal silk to act as a hinge.
This hinge afterward receives some finishing touches, and the top of the door is either pebbled or finished with a few fragments of dead vegetation, cemented on, in order to exactly match the surrounding soil."
V THE RIGHTS OF WILD ANIMALS Every harmless wild bird and mammal has the right to live out its life according to its destiny; and man is in honor bound to respect those rights.
At the same time it is a mistake to regard each wild bird or quadruped as a sacred thing, which under no circumstances may be utilized by man.
We are not fanatical Hindus of the castes which religiously avoid the "taking of life" of any kind, and gently push aside the flea, the centipede and the scorpion.
The reasoning powers of such people are strictly limited, the same as those of people who are opposed to the removal by death of the bandits and murderers of the human race.
The highest duty of a reasoning being is to reason.
We have no moral or legal right to act like idiots, or to become a menace to society by protecting criminal animals or criminal men from adequate punishment.
Like the tree that is known by its fruit, every alleged "reasoning being" is to be judged by the daily output of his thoughts.
Toward wild life, our highest duty is to be sane and sensible, in order to be just, and to promote the greatest good for the greatest number.
Be neither a Hindu fanatic nor a cruel game- butcher like a certain wild-animal slaughterer whom I knew, who while he was on earth earned for himself a place in the hottest corner of the hereafter, and quickly passed on to occupy it.
The following planks constitute a good platform on which to base our relations with the wild animal world, and by which to regulate our duty to the creatures that have no means of defense against the persecutions of cruel men.
They may be regarded as representing the standards that have been fixed by enlightened and humane civilization.
THE WILD ANIMALS' BILL OF RIGHTS This Bill of Rights is to be copied and displayed conspicuously in all zoological parks and gardens, zoos and menageries; in all theatres and shows where animal performances are given, and in all places where wild animals and birds are trained, sold or kept for the pleasure of their owners.
Article 1.
In view of the nearness of the approach of the higher animals to the human level, no just and humane man can deny that those wild animals have certain rights which man is in honor bound to respect.
Art.
2.
The fact that God gave man "dominion over the beasts of the field" does not imply a denial of animal rights, any more than the supremacy of a human government conveys the right to oppress and maltreat its citizens.
Art.
3.
Under certain conditions it is justifiable for man to kill a limited number of the so-called game animals, on the same basis of justification that domestic animals and fowls may be killed for food.
Art.
4.
While the trapping of fur-bearing animals is a necessary evil, that evil must be minimized by reducing the sufferings of trapped animals to the lowest possible point, and by preventing wasteful trapping.
Art.
5.
The killing of harmless mammals or birds solely for "sport," and without utilizing them when killed, is murder; and no good and humane man will permit himself to engage in any such offenses against good order and the rights of wild creatures.
Art.
6.
Shooting at sea-going creatures from moving vessels, without any possibility of securing them if killed or wounded, is cruel, reprehensible, and criminal, and everywhere should be forbidden by ship captains, and also by law, under penalties.
Art.
7.
The extermination of a harmless wild animal species is a crime; but the regulated destruction of wild pests that have been proven guilty, is sometimes necessary and justifiable.
Art.
8.
No group or species of birds or mammals that is accused of offenses sufficiently grave to merit destruction shall be condemned undefended and unheard, nor without adequate evidence of a character which would be acceptable in a court of law.
Art.
9.
The common assumption that every bird or mammal that offends, or injures the property of any man, is necessarily deserving of death, is absurd and intolerable.
The death penalty should be the last resort, not the first one!
Art.
10.
Any nation that fails adequately to protect its crop-and- tree-protecting birds deserves to have its fields and forests devastated by predatory insects.
Art.
11.
No person has any moral right to keep a wild mammal, bird, reptile or fish in a state of uncomfortable, unhappy or miserable captivity, and all such practices should be prevented by law, under penalty.
It is entirely feasible for a judge to designate a competent person as a referee to examine and decide upon each case.
Art.
12.
A wild creature that cannot be kept in comfortable captivity should not be kept at all; and the evils to be guarded against are cruelly small quarters, too much darkness, too much light, uncleanliness, bad odors, and bad food.
A fish in a glass globe, or a live bird in a cage the size of a collar-box is a case of cruelty.
Art.
13.
Every captive animal that is suffering hopelessly from disease or the infirmities of old age has the right to be painlessly relieved of the burdens of life.
Art.
14.
Every keeper or owner of a captive wild animal who through indolence, forgetfulness or cruelty permits a wild creature in his charge to perish of cold, heat, hunger or thirst because of his negligence, is guilty of a grave misdemeanor, and he should be punished as the evidence and the rights of captive animals demand.
Art.
15.
An animal in captivity has a right to do all the damage to its surroundings that it can do, and it is not to be punished therefor.
Art.
16.
The idea that all captive wild animals are necessarily "miserable" is erroneous, because some captive animals are better fed, better protected and are more happy in captivity than similar animals are in a wild state, beset by dangers and harassed by hunger and thirst.
It is the opinion of the vast majority of civilized people that there is no higher use to which a wild bird or mammal can be devoted than to place it in perfectly comfortable captivity to be seen by millions of persons who desire to make its acquaintance.
Art.
17.
About ninety-five per cent of all the wild mammals seen in captivity were either born in captivity or captured when in their infancy, and therefore have no ideas of freedom, or visions of their wild homes; consequently their supposed "pining for freedom" often is more imaginary than real.
Art.
18.
A wild animal has no more inherent right to live a life of lazy and luxurious ease, and freedom from all care, than a man or woman has to live without work or family cares.
In the large cities of the world there are many millions of toiling humans who are worse off per capita as to burdens and sorrows and joys than are the beasts and birds in a well kept zoological park.
"Freedom" is comparative only, not absolute.
Art.
19.
While the use of trained animals in stage performances is not necessarily cruel, and while training operations are based chiefly upon kindness and reward, it is necessary that vigilance should be exercised to insure that the cages and stage quarters of such animals shall be adequate in size, properly lighted and acceptably ventilated, and that cruel punishments shall not be inflicted upon the animals themselves.
Art.
20.
The training of wild animals may, or may not, involve cruelties, according to the intelligence and the moral status of the trainer.
This is equally true of the training of children, and the treatment of wives and husbands.
A reasonable blow with a whip to a mean and refractory animal in captivity is not necessarily an act of cruelty.
Every such act must be judged according to the evidence.
Art.
21.
It is unjust to proclaim that "all wild animal performances are cruel" and therefore should be prohibited by law.
The claim is untrue, and no lawmaker should pay heed to it.
Wild animal performances are no more cruel or unjust than men-and-women performances of acrobatics.
Practically all trained animals are well fed and tended, they welcome their performances, and go through them with lively interest.
Such performances, when good, have a high educational value,--but not to closed minds.
Art.
22.
Every bull-fight, being brutally unfair to the horses and the bull engaged and disgustingly cruel, is an unfit spectacle for humane and high-minded people, and no Christian man or woman can attend one without self-stultification.
Art.
23.
The western practice of "bulldogging," now permitted in some Wild West shows, is disgusting, degrading, and never should be permitted.
Art.
24.
The use of monkeys by organ-grinders is cruel, it is degrading to the monkeys, and should in all states be prohibited by law.
Art.
25.
The keeping of live fishes in glass globes nearly always ends in cruelty and suffering, and should everywhere be prohibited by law.
A round glass straight-jacket is just as painful as any other kind.
Art.
26.
The sale and use of chained live chameleons as ornaments and playthings for idiotic or vicious men and children always means death by slow torture for the reptile, and should in all states be prohibited by law.
II.
MENTAL TRAITS OF WILD ANIMALS VI THE BRIGHTEST MINDS AMONG AMERICAN ANIMALS We repeat that _the most interesting features of a wild animal are its mind, its thoughts, and the results of its reasoning._ Besides these, its classification, distribution and anatomy are of secondary importance; but at the same time they help to form the foundation on which to build the psychology of species and individuals.
Let no student make the mistake of concluding that when he has learned an animal's place in nature there is nothing more to pursue.
After fifty years of practical experience with wild animals of many species, I am reluctantly compelled to give the prize for greatest cunning and foresight _in self-preservation_ to the common brown rat,--the accursed "domestic" rat that has adopted man as his perpetual servant, and regards man's goods as his lawful prey.
When all other land animals have been exterminated from the earth, the brown rat will remain, to harry and to rob the Last Man.
The brown rat has persistently accompanied man all over the world.
Millions have been spent in fighting him and the bubonic-plague flea that he cheerfully carries in his offensive fur.
For him no place _that contains food_ is too hot or too cold, too wet or too dry.
Many old sailors claim to believe that rats will desert at the dock an outward-bound ship that is fated to be lost at sea; but that certificate of superhuman foreknowledge needs a backing of evidence before it can be accepted.
Of all wild animals, rats do the greatest number of "impossible" things.
We have matched our wits against rat cunning until a madhouse yawned before us.
Twice in my life all my traps and poisons have utterly failed, and left me faintly asking: _Are_ rats possessed of occult powers?
Once the answer to that was furnished by an old he-one who left his tail in my steel trap, but a little later _caught himself_ in a trap-like space in the back of the family aeolian, and ignominiously died there,--a victim of his own error in judging distances without a tape line.
Tomes might be written about the minds and manners of the brown rat, setting forth in detail its wonderful intelligence in quickly getting wise to new food, new shelter, new traps and new poisons.
Six dead rats are, as a rule, sufficient to put any _new_ trap out of business; but poisons and infections go farther before being found out.
[Footnote: For home use, my best rat weapon is rough-on-rats, generously mixed with butter and spread liberally on very thin slices of bread.
It has served me well in effecting clearances.]
The championship for keen strategy in self-preservation belongs to the musk-oxen for their wolf-proof circle of heads and horns.
Every musk-ox herd is a mutual benefit life insurance company.
When a gaunt and hungry wolf-pack appears, the adult bull and cow musk-oxen at once form a close circle, with the calves and young stock in the centre.
That deadly ring of lowered heads and sharp horns, all hung precisely right to puncture and deflate hostile wolves, is impregnable to fang and claw.
The arctic wolves know this well.
Mr. Stefansson says it is the settled habit of wolf packs of Banks Land to pass musk-ox herds without even provoking them to "fall in" for defense.
Judging by the facts that Charles L. Smith and the Norboe brothers related to Mr. Phillips and me around our camp-fires in the Canadian Rockies, the wolverine is one of the most cunning wild animals of all North America.
This is a large order; for the gray wolf and grizzly bear are strong candidates for honors in that contest.
The greatest cunning of the wolverine is manifested in robbing traps, stealing the trapper's food and trap-baits, and at the same time avoiding the traps set for him.
He is wonderfully expert in springing steel traps for the bait or prey there is in them, without getting caught himself.
He will follow up a trap line for miles, springing all traps and devouring all baits as he goes.
Sometimes in sheer wantonness he will throw a trap into a river, and again he will bury a trap in deep snow.
Dead martens in traps are savagely torn from them.
Those that can not be eaten on the spot are carried off and skilfully cached under two or three feet of snow.
Trapper Smith once set a trap for a wolverine, and planted close behind it a young moose skull with some flesh upon it.
The wolverine came in the night, started at a point well away from the trap, dug a tunnel through six feet of snow, fetched up well behind the trap,--and triumphantly dragged away the head through his tunnel.
From the testimony of W. H. Wright, of Spokane, in his interesting book on "The Grizzly Bear," and for other reasons, I am convinced that the Rocky Mountain silver-tip grizzly is our brightest North American animal, and very keen of nose, eye, ear and brain.
Mr. Wright says that "the grizzly bear far excels in cunning any other animal found throughout the Rocky Mountains, and, for that matter, he far excels them all combined."
While the last clause is a large order, I will not dispute the opinion of a man of keen intelligence who has lived much among the most important and interesting wild animals of the Rockies.
In the Bitter Root Mountains Mr. Wright and his hunting party once set a bear trap for a grizzly, in a pen of logs, well baited with fresh meat.
On the second day they found the pen demolished, the bait taken out, and everything that was movable piled on the top of the trap.
The trap was again set, this time loosely, under a bed of moss.
The grizzly came and joyously ate all the meat that was scattered around the trap, but the moss and the trap were left untouched.
And then followed a major operation in bear trapping.
A mile away there was a steep slope of smooth rock, bounded at its foot by a creek.
On one side was a huge tangle of down timber, on the other side loomed some impassable rocks; and a tiny meadow sloped away at the top.
The half-fleshed carcasses of two dead elk were thrown half way down the rock slide, to serve as a bait.
On the two sides two bear guns were set, and to their triggers were attached two long silk fish-lines, stretched taut and held parallel to each other, extending across the rocky slope.
The idea was that the bear could not by any possibility reach the bait from above or below, without setting off at least one gun, and getting a bullet through his shoulders.
On the first night, no guns went off.
The next morning it was found that the bear had crossed the stream and climbed straight up toward the bait until he reached the first fish-line; where he stopped.
Without pressing the string sufficiently to set off its gun, he followed it to the barrier of trees.
Being balked there, he turned about, retraced his steps carefully and followed the string to the barrier of rocks.
Being blocked there, he back- tracked down the slide and across the stream, over the way he came.
Then he widely circled the whole theatre, and came down toward the bait from the little meadow at its top of the slide.
Presently he reached the upper fish-line, twelve feet away from the first one.
First he followed this out to the log barrier, then back to the rock ledge that was supposed to be unclimbable.
There he scrambled up the "impossible" rocks, negotiated the ledge foot by foot, and successfully got around the end of line No.
2.
Getting between the two lines he sailed out across the slope to the elk carcasses, feasted sumptuously, and then meandered out the way he came, without having disturbed a soul.
All this was done at night, and in darkness; and presumably that bear is there to this day, alive and well.
No wonder Mr. Wright has a high opinion of the grizzly bear as a thinking animal.
In hiding their homes and young, either in burrows or in nests on the ground, wild rabbits and hares are wonderfully skilful, even under new conditions.
Being quite unable to fight, or even to dig deeply, they are wholly dependent upon their wits in keeping their young alive by hiding them.
Thanks to their keenness in concealment, the gray rabbit is plentiful throughout the eastern United States in spite of its millions of enemies.
Is it not wonderful?
The number killed by hunters last year in Pennsylvania was about 3,500,000!
The most amazing risk that I ever saw taken by a rabbit was made by a gray rabbit that nested in a shallow hole in the middle of a lawn-mower lawn east of the old National Museum building in Washington.
The hollow was like that of a small wash-basin, and when at rest in it with her young ones the neutral gray back of the mother came just level with the top of the ground.
At the last, when her young were almost large enough to get out and go under their own steam, a lawn-mower artist chanced to look down at the wrong moment and saw the family.
Evidently that mother believed that the boldest ventures are those most likely to win.
Among the hoofed and horned animals of North America the white- tailed deer is the shrewdest in the recognition of its enemies, the wisest in the choice of cover, and in measures for self- preservation.
It seems at first glance that the buck is more keen- witted than the doe; but this is a debatable question.
Throughout the year the buck thinks only of himself.
During fully one-half the year the doe is burdened by the cares of motherhood, and the paramount duty of saving her fawns from their numerous enemies.
This, I am quite sure, is the handicap which makes it so much easier to kill a doe in the autumn hunting season than to bag a fully antlered and sophisticated buck who has only himself to consider.
The white-tailed deer saves its life by skulking low in timber and thick brush.
This is why it so successfully resists the extermination that has almost swept the mule deer, antelope, white goat, moose and elk from all the hunting-grounds of the United States.
Thanks to its alertness in seeing its enemies first, its skill and quickness in hiding, _and its mental keenness in recognizing and using deer sanctuaries,_ the white- tailed or "Virginia" deer will outlive all the other hoofed animals of North America.
In Pennsylvania they know enough to rush for the wire-bounded protected area whenever the hunters appear.
That state has twenty-six such deer sanctuaries,--well filled with deer.
The moose and caribou dwell upon open or half-open ground, and are at the mercy of the merciless long-range rifles.
Their keenness does not count much against rifles that can shoot and kill at a quarter of a mile.
In the rutting season the bull moose of Maine or New Brunswick is easily deceived by the "call" of a birch-bark megaphone in the hands of a moose hunter who imitates the love call of the cow moose so skilfully that neither moose nor man can detect the falsity of the lure.
The mountain sheep is wide-eyed, alert and ready to run, but he dwells in exposed places from the high foothills up to the mountain summits, and now even the most bungling hunter can find him and kill him at long range.
In the days of black powder and short ranges the sheep had a chance to escape; but now he has none whatever.
He has keener vision and more alertness than the goat, but as a real life-saving factor that amounts to nothing!
Wild sheep are easily and quickly exterminated.
The mountain goat has no protection except elevation and precipitous rocks, and to the hunter who has the energy to climb up to him he, too, is easy prey.
Usually his biped enemy finds him and attacks him in precipitous mountains, where running and hiding are utterly impossible.
When discovered on a ledge two feet wide leading across the face of a precipice, poor Billy has nothing to do but to take the bullets as they come until he reels and falls far down to the cruel slide-rock.
He has a wonderful mind, but its qualities and its usefulness belong in Chapter XIII.
Warm-Coated Animals Avoid "Fresh Air."
On this subject there is a strange divergence of reasoning power between the wild animals of cold countries and the sleeping-porch advocates of today.
Even the most warm-coated of the fur-bearing animals, such as the bears, foxes, beavers, martens and mink, and also the burrowing rodents, take great pains to den up in winter just as far from the "fresh air" of the cold outdoors as they can attain by deep denning or burrowing.
The prairie-dog not only ensconces himself in a cul-de-sac at the end of a hole fourteen feet deep and long, but as winter sets in he also tightly plugs up the mouth of his den with moist earth.
When sealed up in his winter den the black bear of the north draws his supply of fresh air through a hole about one inch in diameter, or less.
But the human devotees of fresh air reason in the opposite direction.
It is now the regular thing for mothers to open wide to the freezing air of out-doors either one or all the windows of the rooms in which their children sleep, giving to each child enough fresh air to supply ten full-grown elephants, or twenty head of horses.
And the final word is the "sleeping-porch!"
It matters not how deadly damp is the air along with its 33 degrees of cold, or the velocity of the wind, the fresh air must be delivered.
The example of the fat and heavily furred wild beast is ignored; and I just wonder how many people in the United States, old and young, have been killed, or permanently injured, by fresh air, during the last fifteen years.
And furthermore.
Excepting the hoofed species, it is the universal rule of the wild animals of the cold-winter zones of the earth that the mother shall keep her helpless young close beside her in the home nest and keep them warm partly by the warmth of her own body.
The wild fur-clad mother does not maroon her helpless offspring in an isolated cot in a room apart, upon a thin mattress and in an atmosphere so cold that it is utterly impossible for the poor little body and limbs to warm it and keep it warm.
Yet many human mothers do just that, and some take good care to provide a warmer atmosphere for themselves than they joyously force upon their helpless infants.
No dangerous fads should be forced upon defenseless children or animals.
A proper amount of fresh air is very desirable, but the intake of a child is much less than that of an elephant.
Besides, if Nature had intended that men should sleep outdoors in winter, with the moose and caribou, we would have been furnished with ruminant pelage and fat.
VII KEEN BIRDS AND DULL MEN If all men could know how greatly the human species varies from highest to lowest, and how the minds and emotions of the lowest men parallel and dove-tail with those of the highest quadrupeds and birds, we might be less obsessed with our own human ego, and more appreciative of the intelligence of animals.
A thousand times in my life my blood has been brought to the boiling point by seeing or reading of the cruel practices of ignorant and vicious men toward animals whom they despised because of their alleged standing "below man."
By his vicious and cruel nature, many a man is totally unfitted to own, or even to associate with, dogs, horses and monkeys.
Many persons are born into the belief that every man is necessarily a "lord of creation," and that all animals per se are man's lawful prey.
In the vicious mind that impression increases with age.
Minds of the better classes can readily learn by precept or by reasoning from cause to effect the duty of man to observe and defend the God- given rights of animals.
It was very recently that I saw on the street a group that represented man's attitude toward wild animals.
It consisted of an unclean and vicious-looking man in tramp's clothing, grinding an offensive hand-organ and domineering over a poor little terrorized "ringtail" monkey.
The wretched mite from the jungle was encased in a heavy woolen straight-jacket, and there was a strap around its loins to which a stout cord was attached, running to the Root of All Evil.
The pavement was hot, but there with its bare and tender feet on the hot concrete, the sad-eyed little waif painfully moved about, peering far up into the faces of passers-by for sympathy, but all the time furtively and shrinkingly watching its tormentor.
Every now and then the hairy old tramp would jerk the monkey's cord, each time giving the frail creature a violent bodily wrench from head to foot.
I think that string was jerked about forty times every hour.
And that exhibition of monkey torture in a monkey hell continues in summer throughout many states of our country,--because "it pleases the children!"
The use of monkeys with hand-organs is a cruel outrage upon the monkey tribe, and no civilized state or municipality should tolerate it.
I call upon all humane persons to put an end to it.
As an antidote to our vaulting human egotism, we should think often upon the closeness of mental contact between the highest animals and the lowest men.
In drawing a parallel between those two groups, there are no single factors more valuable than the home, and the family food supply.
These hark back to the most primitive instincts of the vertebrates.
They are the bedrock foundations upon which every species rests.
As they are stable or unstable, good or bad, so lives or dies the individual, and the species also.
In employing the term "highest animals" I wish to be understood as referring to the warm-blooded vertebrates, and not merely the apes and monkeys that both structurally and mentally are nearest to man.
Throughout my lifetime I have been by turns amazed, entertained and instructed by the marvelous intelligence and mechanical skill of small mammals in constructing burrows, and of certain birds in the construction of their nests.
Today the hanging nest of the Baltimore oriole is to me an even greater wonder than it was when I first saw one over sixty years ago.
Even today the mechanical skill involved in its construction is beyond my comprehension.
My dull brain can not figure out the processes by which the bird begins to weave its hanging purse at the tip end of the most unstable of all earthly building sites,--a down-hanging elm-tree branch that is swayed to and fro by every passing breeze.
The situation is so "impossible" that thus far no moving picture artist has ever caught and recorded the process.
Take in your hand a standard oriole nest, and examine it thoroughly.
First you will note that it is very strong, and thoroughly durable.
It can stand the lashings of the fiercest gales that visit our storm-beaten shore.
How long would it take a man to unravel that nest, wisp by wisp, and resolve it into a loose pile of materials?
Certainly not less than an entire day.
Do you think that even your skilful fingers,-- unassisted by needles,--could in two days, or in three, weave of those same materials a nest like that, that would function as did the original?
I doubt it.
The materials consist of long strips of the thin inner bark of trees, short strings, and tiny grass stems that are long, pliable and tough.
Who taught the oriole how to find and to weave those rare and hard-to-find materials?
And how did it manage all that weaving with its beak only?
Let the wise ones answer, if they can; for I confess that I can not!
Down in Venezuela, in the delta of the Orinoco River, and elsewhere, lives a black and yellow bird called the giant cacique (pronounced cay-seek'), which as a nest-builder far surpasses our oriole.
Often the cacique's hanging nest is from four to six feet long.
The oriole builds to escape the red squirrels, but the cacique has to reckon with the prehensile-tailed monkeys.
Sometimes a dozen caciques will hang their nests in close proximity to a wasps' nest, as if for additional protection.
A cacique's nest hangs like a grass rope, with a commodious purse at its lower end, entered by a narrow perpendicular slit a foot or so above the terminal facilities.
It is impossible to achieve one of these nests without either shooting off the limb to which it hangs, or felling the tree.
If it hangs low enough a charge of coarse shot usually will cut the limb, but if high, cutting it down with a rifle bullet is a more serious matter.
[Illustration with caption: HANGING NEST OF THE BALTIMORE ORIOLE (From the "American Natural History")] [Illustration with caption: GREAT HANGING NESTS OF THE CRESTED CACIQUE As seen in the delta of the Orinoco Rover, Venezuela.]
To our Zoological Park visitors the African weaver birds are a wonder and a delight.
Orioles and caciques do not build nests in captivity, but the weavers blithely transfer their activities to their spacious cage in our tropical-bird house.
The bird-men keep them supplied with raffia grass, and they do the rest.
Fortunately for us, they weave nests for fun, and work at it all the year round!
Millions of visitors have watched them doing it.
To facilitate their work the upper half of their cage is judiciously supplied with tree-branches of the proper size and architectural slant.
The weaving covers many horizontal branches.
Sometimes a group of nests will be tied together in a structure four feet long; and it branches up, or down, or across, seemingly without rhyme or reason.
Some of the weavers, which inhabit Africa, Malayana and Australia, are "communal" nest-builders.
They build colonies of nests, close together.
Imagine twenty-five or more Baltimore orioles massing their nests together on one side of a single tree, in a genuine village.
That is the habit of some of the weaver birds;--and this brings us to what is called the most wonderful of all manifestations of house-building intelligence among birds.
It is the community house of the little sociable weaver-bird of South Africa (_Philetoerus socius_).
Having missed seeing the work of this species save in museums, I will quote from the Royal Natural History, written by the late Dr. Richard Lydekker, an excellent description: --This species congregates in large flocks, many pairs incubating their eggs under the same roof, which is composed of cartloads of grass piled on a branch of some camel- thorn tree in one enormous mass of an irregular umbrella shape, looking like a miniature haystack and almost solid, but with the under surface (which is nearly flat) honeycombed all over with little cavities, which serve not only as places for incubation, but also as a refuge against rain and wind.
"They are constantly being repaired by their active little inhabitants.
It is curious that even the initiated eye is constantly being deceived by these dome-topped structures, since at a distance they closely resemble native huts.
The nesting- chambers themselves are warmly lined with feathers."
Here must we abruptly end our exhibits of the intelligence of a few humble little birds as fairly representative of the wonderful mental ability and mechanical skill so common in the ranks of the birds of the world.
It would be quite easy to write a volume on The Architectural Skill of Birds!
Now, let us look for a moment into the house-building intelligence and skill of some of the lower tribes of men.
Out of the multitude of exhibits available I will limit myself to three, widely separated.
In the first place, the habitations of the savage and barbaric tribes are usually the direct result of their own mental and moral deficiencies.
The Eskimo is an exception, because his home and its location are dictated by the hard and fierce circumstances which dictate to him what he must do.
Often he is compelled to move as his food supply moves.
The Cliff-Dweller Indian of the arid regions of the Southwest was forced to cliff- dwell, in order to stave off extermination by his enemies.
Under that spur he became a wonderful architect and engineer.
For present purposes we are concerned with three savage tribes which might have been rich and prosperous agriculturists or herdsmen had they developed sufficient intelligence to see the wisdom of regular industry.
Consider first the lowest of three primitive tribes that inhabit the extreme southern point of Patagonia, whose real estate holdings front on the Strait of Magellan.
That region is treeless, rocky, windswept, cold and inhospitable.
I can not imagine a place better fitted for an anarchist penal colony.
North of it lie plains less rigorous, and by degrees less sterile, and finally there are lands quite habitable by cattle-and-crop-growing men.
But those three tribes elect to stick to the worst spot in South America.
The most primitive is the tribe of "canoe Indians" of Tierra del Fuego, which probably represents the lowest rung of the human ladder.
Beside them the cave men of 30,000 years ago were kings and princes.
Their only rivals seem to be the Poonans of Central Borneo, who, living in a hot country, make no houses or shelters of any kind, and have no clothing but a long strip of bark cloth around the loins.
The Fuegians have long been known to mariners and travellers.
They inhabit a region that half the year is bleak, cold and raw, but they make nothing save the rudest of the rude in canoes--of rough slabs tied together and caulked _with moss,_--and rough bone- pointed spears, bows, arrows and paddles.
Their only clothing consists of skins of the guanacos loosely hung from the neck, and flapping over the naked and repulsive body.
They make no houses, and on shore their only shelters from the wind and snow and chilling rains are rabbit-like forms of brush, broken off by hand.
These people are lower in the scale of intelligence than any wild animal species known to me; for they are mentally too dull and low to maintain themselves on a continuing basis.
Their hundred years of contact with man has taught them little; and numerically they are decreasing so rapidly that the world will soon see the absolute finish of the tribe.
In the best of the three tribes, the Tchuelclus, the birth rate is so low that within recent times the tribe has diminished from about 5,000 to a remnant of about 500.
Now, have those primitive creatures "immortal souls?"
Are they entitled to call chimpanzees, elephants, bears and dogs "lower animals?"
Do they "think," or "reason," any more than the animals I have named?
It is a far cry from the highest to the lowest of the human race; and we hold that the highest animals intellectually are higher than the lowest men.
Now go with me for a moment to the lofty and dense tropical forest in the heart of the Territory of Selangor, in the Malay Peninsula.
That forest is the home of the wild elephant, rhinoceros and sladang.
And there dwells a jungle tribe called the Jackoons, some members of which I met at their family home, and observed literally in their own ancestral tree.
Their house was not wholly bad, but it might have been 100 per cent better.
It was merely a platform of small poles, placed like a glorified bird's nest in the spreading forks of a many-branched tree, about twenty feet from the ground.
The main supports were bark-lashed to the large branches of the family tree.
Over this there was a rude roof of long grass, which had a fairly intelligent slope.
As a shelter from rain, the Jackoon house left much to be desired.
The scanty loin cloths of the habitants knew no such thing as wash-day or line.
With all its drawbacks, however, this habitation was far more adequate to the needs of its builders than the cold brush rabbit-forms of the Patagonian canoe Indians.
We now come to a tribe which has reduced the problem of housing and home life to its lowest common denominator.
The Poonans of Central Borneo, discovered and described by Carl Bock, build _no houses of any kind,_ not even huts of green branches; and their only overture toward the promotion of personal comfort in the home is a five-foot grass mat spread upon the sodden earth, to lie upon when at rest.
And this, in a country where in the so-called "dry season" it rains half the time, and in the "wet season" all the time.
The Poonans have rudely-made spears for taking the wild pig, deer and smaller game, their clothes consist of bark cloth, around the loins only.
They know no such thing as agriculture, and they live off the jungle.
It was said some years ago that a similarly primitive jungle tribe of Ceylon, known as the Veddahs, could count no more than five, that they could not comprehend "day after to-morrow," and that their vocabulary was limited to about 200 words.
It is very probable that the language of the Poonans and the Jackoons is equally limited.
And what are we to conclude from all the foregoing?
Briefly, I should say that the architectural skill of the orioles, the caciques and the weaver birds is greater than that of the South Patagonia native, the Jackoon and the Poonan.
I should say that those bird homes yield to their makers more comfort and protection, and a better birth-rate, than are yielded by the homes of those ignorant, unambitious and retrogressive tribes of men now living and thinking, and supposed to be possessed of reasoning powers.
If the whole truth could be known, I believe it would be found that the stock of ideas possessed and used by the groups of highly-endowed birds would fully equal the ideas of such tribes of simple-minded men as those mentioned.
If caught young, those savages could be trained by civilized men, and taught to perform many tricks, but so can chimpanzees and elephants.
Curiously enough, it is a common thing for even the higher types of civilized men to make in home-building just as serious mistakes as are made by wild animals and savages.
For example, among the men of our time it is a common mistake to build in the wrong place, to build entirely too large or too ugly, and to build a Colossal Burden instead of a real Home.
From many a palace there stands forth the perpetual question: "_Why_ did he do it?"
Any reader who at any time inclines toward an opinion that the author is unduly severe on the mentality of the human race, even as it exists today in the United States, is urged to read in the _Scientific Monthly_ for January, 1922, an article by Professor L. M. Tennan entitled "Adventures in Stupidity.--A Partial Analysis of the Intellectual Inferiority of a College Student."
He should particularly note the percentages on page 34 in the second paragraph under the subtitle "The Psychology of Stupidity."
VIII THE MENTAL STATUS OF THE ORANG-UTAN My first ownership of a live orang-utan began in 1878, in the middle of the Simujan River, Borneo, where for four Spanish dollars I became the proud possessor of a three-year old male.
No sooner was the struggling animal deposited in the bottom of my own boat than it savagely seized the calf of my devoted leg and endeavored to bite therefrom a generous cross section.
My leggings and my leech stockings saved my life.
That implacable little beast never gave up; and two days later it died,--apparently to spite me.
My next orang was a complete reverse of No.
1.
He liked not the Dyaks who brought him to me, but in the first moment of our acquaintance he adopted me as his foster-father, and loved me like a son.
Throughout four months of jungle vicissitudes he stuck to me.
He was a high-class orang,--and be it known that many orangs are thin-headed scrubs, who never amount to anything.
His skull was wide, his face was broad, and he had a dome of thought like a statesman.
He had a fine mind, and I am sure I could have taught him everything that any ape could learn.
During the four months that he lived with me I taught him, almost without effort, many things that were necessary in our daily life.
Even the Dyaks recognized the fact that the "Old Man" was an orang (or "mias") of superior mind, and some of them traveled far to see him.
Unfortunately the exigencies of travel and work compelled me to present him to an admiring friend in India.
Mr. Andrew Carnegie and his then partner, Mr. J. W. Vandevorst, convoyed my Old Man and another small orang from Singapore to Colombo, Ceylon, whence they were shipped on to Madras, received there by my old friend A. G. R. Theobald,--and presented at the court of the Duke of Buckingham.
Up to a comparatively recent date, the studies of the psychologists that have been devoted to the minds of animals below man, have been chiefly concerned with low and common types.
Comparatively few investigators have found it possible to make extensive and prolonged observations of the most intelligent wild animals of the world, even in zoological gardens, and their observations on wild animals in a state of nature seem to have been even more circumscribed.
I know only three who have studied any of the great apes.
In attempting to fathom the mental capacity and the mental processes of some of the highest mammals, there is the same superior degree of interest attaching to the study of wild species that the ethnologist finds in the study of savage races of men that have been unspoiled by civilization.
Obviously, it is more interesting to fathom the mind of a creature in an absolute state of nature than of one whose ancestors have been bred and reared in the trammels of domestication and for many successive generations have bowed to the will of man.
The natural fury of the Atlantic walrus, when attacked, is much more interesting as a psychologic study than is the inbred rage of the bull-dog; and the remarkable defensive tactics of the musk-ox far surpass in interest the vagaries of range cattle.
For several reasons, the great apes, and particularly the chimpanzees and orang-utans, are the most interesting subjects for psychologic study of all the wild-animal species with which the writer is acquainted.
Primarily this is due to the fact that intellectually and temperamentally, as well as anatomically, these animals stand very near to man himself, and closely resemble him.
The great apes mentioned can give visible expression to a wide range of thoughts and emotions, The voice of the adult orang-utan is almost absent, and only sufficient to display on rare occasions.
What little there is of it, in animals over six years of age, is very deep and guttural, and may best be described as a deep-bass roar.
Under excitement the orang can produce a roar by inhalation.
Young orangs under two years of age often whine, or shriek or scream with anger, like excited human children, but with their larger growth that vocal power seems to leave them.
Despite the difference in temperament and quickness in delivery, I regard the measure of the orang-utan's mental capacity as being equal to that of the chimpanzee; but the latter is, and always will remain, the more alert and showy animal.
The superior feet of the chimpanzee in bipedal work is for that species a great advantage, and the longer toes of the orang are a handicap.
Although the orang's sanguine temperament is far more comforting to a trainer than the harum-scarum nervous vivacity of the chimpanzee, the value of the former is overbalanced, on the stage, by the superior acting of the chimp.
For these reasons the trainers generally choose the chimp for stage education.
The chimpanzee is not only nervous and quick in thought and in action, but it is equally so _in temper._ It will play with any good friend to almost any extent, but the moment it suspects malicious unfairness, or what it regards as a "mean trick," it instantly becomes angry and resentful.
Once when I attempted to take from our large black-faced chimpanzee, called Soko, a small lump of rubber which I feared she might swallow, my efforts were kindly but firmly thwarted.
At last, when I diverted her by small offerings of chocolate, and at the right moment sought by a strategic movement to snatch the rubber from her, the palpable unfairness of the attempt caused the animal instantly to fly into a towering passion, and seek to wreak vengeance upon me.
Her lips drew far back in a savage snarl, and she denounced my perfidy by piercing cries of rage and indignation.
She also did her utmost to seize and drag me forcibly within reach of her teeth, for the punishment which she felt that I deserved.
A large male orang-utan named Dohong, under a similar test, revealed a very different mental attitude.
He dexterously snatched a valuable watch-charm from a visitor who stood inside the railing of his cage, and fled with it to the top of his balcony.
As quickly as possible I thrust my handkerchief between the bars, and waved it vigorously, to attract him.
At once the animal came down to me, to secure another trophy, and before he realized his position I successfully snatched the charm from him, and restored it unharmed to its owner.
Dohong seemed to regard the episode as a good joke.
Without manifesting any resentment he turned a somersault on his straw, then climbed upon his trapeze and began to perform, as if nothing in particular had occurred.
The orang is distinctly an animal of more serene temper and more philosophic mind than the chimpanzee.
This has led some authors erroneously to pronounce the orang an animal of morose and sluggish disposition, and mentally inferior to the chimpanzee.
After a close personal acquaintance with about forty captive orangs of various sizes, I am convinced that the facts do not warrant that conclusion.
The orang-utans of the New York Zoological Park certainly have been as cheerful in disposition, as fond of exercise and as fertile in droll performances as our chimpanzees.
Even though the mind of the chimpanzee does act more quickly than that of its rival, and even though its movements are usually more rapid and more precise, the mind of the orang carries that animal precisely as far.
Moreover, in its native jungles the orang habitually builds for itself a very comfortable nest on which to rest and sleep, which the chimpanzee ordinarily does not do.
I think that the exact mental status of an anthropoid ape is best revealed by an attempt to train it to do some particular thing, in a manner that the trainer elects.
Usually about five lessons, carefully observed, will afford a good index of the pupil's mental capabilities.
Some chimpanzees are too nervous to be taught, some are too obstinate, and others are too impatient of restraint.
Some orang-utans are hopelessly indifferent to the business in hand, and refuse to become interested in it.
I think that no orang is too dull to learn to sit at a table, and eat with the utensils that are usually considered sacred to man's use, but the majority of them care only for the food, and take no interest in the function.
On the other hand, the average chimpanzee is as restless as a newly-caught eel, and its mind is dominated by a desire to climb far beyond the reach of restraining hands, and to do almost anything save that which is particularly desired.
Among the twenty or more orangs which up to 1922 have been exhibited in the Zoological Park, two stand out with special prominence, by reason of their unusual mental qualities.
They differed widely from each other.
One was a born actor and imitator, who loved human partnership in his daily affairs.
The other was an original thinker and reasoner, with a genius for invention, and at all times impatient of training and restraint.
The first was named Rajah, the latter was called Dohong.
Rajah was a male orang, and about four years of age when received by us.
His high and broad forehead, large eyes and general breadth of cranium and jaw marked him at once as belonging to the higher caste of orangs.
Dealers and experts have no difficulty in recognizing at one glance an orang that has a good brain and good general physique from those which are thin-headed, narrow-jawed, weak in body and unlikely to live long.
At the Zoological Park we have tested out the orang-utan's susceptibility to training, and proven that the task is so simple and easy that even amateurs can accomplish much in a short time.
Desiring that several of our orangs should perform in public, we instructed the primate keepers to proceed along certain lines and educate them to that idea.
Naturally, the performance was laid out to match our own possibilities.
In a public park, where only a very little time can be devoted to training, we do not linger long over an animal that is either stupid or obstinate.
Those which cannot be trained easily and quickly are promptly set aside as ineligible.
Without any great amount of labor, and with no real difficulty, our orangs were trained to perform the following simple acts: 1.
To sit at table, and eat and drink like humans.
This involved eating sliced bananas with a fork, pouring out milk from a teapot into a teacup, drinking out of a teacup, drinking out of a beer- bottle, using a toothpick, striking a match, lighting a cigarette, smoking and spitting like a man.
2.
To ride a tricycle, or bicycle.
3.
To put on a pair of trousers, adjust the suspenders, put on a sweater or coat, and a cap, reversing the whole operation after the performance.
4.
To drive nails with a hammer.
5.
Use a key to lock and unlock a padlock.
The animal most proficient in this became able to select the right Yale key out of a bunch of half a dozen or more, with as much quickness and precision as the average man displays.
The orang Dohong learned to pedal and to guide a tricycle in about three lessons.
He caught the two ideas almost instantly, and soon brought his muscles under control sufficiently to ride successfully, even under difficult conditions.
It was quickly recognized that our Rajah was a particularly good subject, and with him the keepers went farther than with the four others.
From the first moment, the training operations were to him both interesting and agreeable.
The animal enjoyed the work, and he entered into it so heartily that in two weeks he was ready to dine in public, somewhat after the manner of human beings.
A platform eight feet in height was erected in front of the Reptile House, and upon it were placed a table, a high chair such as small children use, and various dishes.
To the platform a step- ladder led upward from the ground.
Every day at four o'clock lusty Rajah was carried to the exhibition space, and set free upon the ground.
Forthwith the keepers proceeded to dress him in trousers, vest, coat and cap.
The moment the last button had been fastened and the cap placed upon his head, he would promptly walk to the ladder, climb up to the platform, and in the most business-like way imaginable, seat himself in his chair at the table, all ready to dine.
He used a napkin, ate his soup with a spoon, speared and conveyed his sliced bananas with his fork, poured milk from a teapot into his teacup, and drank from his cup with great enjoyment and decorum.
When he took a drink (of tea) from a suspicious-looking black bottle, the audience always laughed.
When he elevated the empty bottle to one eye and looked far into it, they roared; and when he finally took a toothpick and gravely placed it in his mouth, his auditors were delighted.
Several times during the progress of each meal, Rajah would pause and benignly gaze down upon the crowd, like a self-satisfied judge on his bench.
Not once did Rajah spoil this exhibition, which was continued throughout an entire summer, nor commit any overt act of impatience, indifference or meanness.
The flighty, nervous temper of the chimpanzee was delightfully absent.
The most remarkable feature of it all was his very evident enjoyment of his part of the performance, and his sense of responsibility to us and to his audiences.
Rajah easily and quickly learned to ride a tricycle, and guide it himself.
But for his untimely death, through a remarkable invasion of a microscopic parasite (_Balentidium coli_) imported from the Galapagos Islands by elephant tortoises, his mind would have been developed much farther.
Since his death, in 1902, we have had other orang-utans that were successfully taught to dine, but none of them entered into the business with the same hearty zest which characterized Rajah, and made his performances so interesting.
We now come to a consideration of simian mental traits of very different character.
Another male orang, named Dohong, of the same age and intellectual caste as Rajah, developed a faculty for mechanics and invention which not only challenged our admiration, but also created much work for our carpenters.
He discovered, or invented,  as you please, the lever as a mechanical force,--as fairly and squarely as Archimedes discovered the principle of the screw.
Moreover, he delighted in the use of the new power thus acquired, quite as much as the successful inventor usually does.
At the same time, two very bright chimpanzees of his own age, and with the same opportunities, discovered nothing.
[Illustration caption: THUMB-PRINT OF AN ORANG-UTAN A group of fourteen experts in the New York City Departement of Criminal Records were unable to recognise this thumb print as anything else than that of a man] [Illustration caption: "RAJAH," THE ACTOR ORANG-UTAN In three lessons he learned to ride a tricycle] Dohong was of a reflective turn of mind, and never was entirely willing to learn the things that his keepers sought to teach him.
To him, dining at a table was tiresomely dull, and the donning of fashionable clothing was a frivolous pastime, On the other hand, the interior of his cage, and his gymnastic appliances of ropes, trapeze and horizontal bars, all interested him greatly.
Every square inch of surface, and every piece of material in his apartment, was carefully investigated, many times over.
When three years old he discovered his own strength, and at first he used it good-naturedly to hector his cage-mate, a female chimpanzee smaller than himself.
That, however, was of trifling interest.
The day on which he made the discovery that he could break the wooden one and one-half inch horizontal bars that were held out from his cage walls on cast iron brackets, was for him a great day.
Before his discovery was noted by the keepers he had joyfully destroyed two bars, and with a broken piece used as a lever was attacking a third.
These bars were promptly replaced by larger bars, of harder wood, but screwed to the same cast-iron brackets that had carried the first series.
For a time, the heavier bars endured; but in an evil moment the ape swung his trapeze bar, of two-inch oak, far over to one side of his cage, and applied the bar as a lever, inside of a horizontal bar and from above.
The new force was too much for the cast-iron brackets, and one by one they gave way.
Some were broken off, and others were torn from the wall by the breaking of the screws that held them.
Knowing that all those brackets must be changed immediately, Dohong was left to destroy them; which he did, promptly and joyfully.
We then made heavy brackets of flat wrought iron bars, 1/2 by 21/2 inches, unbreakable even with a lever.
These were screwed on with screws so large and heavy that our carpenters knew they were quite secure.
[Illustration caption: THE LEVER THAT OUR ORANG-UTAN INVENTED, AND THE WAY HE APPLIED IT By W. A. Camadeo, in the "Scientific American," 1907] In due time, Dohong tested his lever upon the bars with their new brackets, and at first they held securely.
Then he engaged Polly, his chimpanzee companion, to assist him to the limit of her strength.
While Dohong pulled on the lever, Polly braced her absurd little back against the wall, and pushed upon it, with all her strength.
At first nothing gave way.
The combined strength exerted by the three brackets was not to be overcome by prying at the horizontal bar itself.
It was then that Dohong's inventive genius rose to its climax.
He decided to attack the brackets singly, and conquer them one by one.
On examining the situation very critically, he found that each bracket consisted of a right- angled triangle of wrought iron, with its perpendicular side against the wall, its base uppermost, and its hypotenuse out in the air.
Through the open centre of the triangle he introduced the end of his trapeze bar, chain and all, as far as it would go, then gave a mighty heave.
The end of his lever was against the wall, and the power was applied in such a manner that few machine screws could stand so great a strain.
One by one, the screws were torn out of the wood, and finally each bracket worked upon was torn off.
But there was one exception.
The screws of one bracket were so firmly set in a particularly hard strip of the upright tongued- and-grooved yellow pine flooring that formed the wall, the board itself was finally torn out, full length!
The board was four inches wide, seven-eighths of an inch thick, and seven feet long.
Originally it was so firmly nailed that no one believed that it could be torn from its place.
[Footnote: In the Winter of 1921 about a dozen newspapers in the United States published a sensational syndicated article, occupying an entire page, in which all of Dohong's lever discovery and cage-wrecking performances were reported as of recent occurrence, and credited to a stupid and uninteresting young orang called Gabong, now in the Zoological Park, that has not even the merit of sufficient intelligence to maintain a proper state of bodily uprightness, let alone the invention of mechanical principles.]
Without delay, Dohong started in with his lever to pry off the remaining boards of the wall, but this movement was promptly checked.
Our next task consisted in making long bolts by which the brackets of the horizontal bars were bolted entirely through the partition walls and held so powerfully on the other side that even the lever could not wreck them.
As soon as the brackets were made secure, Dohong turned his attention to the two large sleeping boxes which were built very solidly on the balcony of his cage.
Both of those structures he tore completely to pieces,--always working with the utmost good nature and cheerfulness.
Realizing that they could not exist in the cage with him, we gave him a permit to tear them out--and save the time of the carpenters.
Dohong's use of his lever was seen by hundreds of visitors, and one frequent visitor to the Park, Mr. L. A. Camacho, an engineer, was so much impressed that he published in the _Scientific American_ an illustrated account of what he saw.
For a long period, Dohong had been more or less annoyed by the fact that he could not get his head out between the front bars of his cage, and look around the partition into the home of his next- door neighbor.
Very soon after he discovered the use of the lever, he swung his trapeze bar out to the upper corner of his cage, thrust the end of it out between the first bar and the steel column of the partition, and very deftly bent two of the iron bars outward far enough so that he could easily thrust his head outside and have his coveted look.
One of our later and largest orangs made a specialty of twisting the straw of his bedding into a rope six or seven feet long, then throwing it over his trapeze bar and swinging by it, forward and back.
Time and space will not permit the enumeration of the various things done by that ape of mechanical mind with his swinging rope and his trapeze, with ropes of straw _twisted by himself,_ with keys, locks, hammer, nails and boxes.
Any man who can witness such manifestations as those described above, and deny the existence in the animal of an ability to reason from cause to effect, must be prepared to deny the evidence of his own senses.
The individual variations between orangs, as also between chimpanzees, are great and striking.
It may with truth be said that no two individuals of either species are really quite alike in physiognomy, temperament and mental capacity.
As subjects for the experimental psychologist, it is difficult to see how any other could be found that would be even a good second in living interest to the great apes.
The facts thus far recorded, so I believe, present only a suggestion of the rich results that await the patient scientific investigator.
In the year 1915 Dr. Robert M. Yerkes, of Harvard University, conducted at Montecito, southern California, in a comfortable primate laboratory, six months of continuous and diligent experiments on the behavior of orang-utans and monkeys.
His report, published under the title of "The Mental Life of Monkeys and Apes: A Study of Ideational Behavior," is a document of much interest and value.
Dr. Yerkes' use of the orang-utan as a subject was a decided step forward in the study of "animal behavior" in America.
IX THE MAN-LIKENESS OF THE CHIMPANZEE During the past twenty years, millions of thinking people have been startled, and not a few shocked, by the amazing and uncanny human-likeness of the performances of trained chimpanzees on the theatrical stage.
Really, when a well trained "chimp" is dressed from head to foot like a man, and is seen going with quickness, precision and spirit through a performance half an hour in length, we go away from it with an uncomfortable feeling that speech is all that he lacks of being a citizen.
In 1904 the American public saw Esau.
Next came Consul,--in about three or four separate editions!
In 1909 we had Peter.
Then came I know not how many more, including the giant Casey and Mr. Garner's Susie; and finally in 1918 our own Suzette.
The theatre-going public has been well supplied with trained chimpanzees, and the mental capacity of that species is now more widely known and appreciated than that of any other wild animal except the Indian elephant.
There are several reasons why chimpanzees predominate on the stage, and why so few performing orang-utans have been seen.
They are as follows: 1.
The orang is sanguine, and slower in execution than the nervous chimpanzee.
2.
The feet of the orang are not good for shoes, and biped work.
3.
The orang is rather awkward with its hands, and finally, 4.
There are fully twice as many chimps in the market.
But the chimpanzee has certain drawbacks of his own.
His nervous temper and his forced-draught activities soon wear him out.
If he survives to see his sixth or seventh year, it is then that he becomes so strong and so full of ego that he becomes dangerous and requires to be retired.
Bright minds are more common among the chimpanzee species than among the orangs.
Three chimps out of every five are good for training, but not more than two orangs out of five can be satisfactorily developed.
Some sensitive minds shrink from the idea that man has "descended" from the apes.
I never for a moment shared that feeling.
I would rather descend from a clean, capable and bright-minded genus of apes than from any unclean, ignorant and repulsive race of the genus _Homo._ In comparing the chimpanzees of Fernan Vaz with the Canoe Indians of the Strait of Magellan and other human tribes we could name, I think the former have decidedly the best of it.
There are millions of members of the human race who are more loathsome and repulsive than wild apes.
The face of the chimpanzee is highly mobile, and the mouth, lips, eyes and voice express the various emotions of the individual with a degree of clearness and precision second only to the facial expression of man himself.
In fact, the face of an intelligent chimpanzee or orang-utan is a fairly constant index of the state of mind of the individual.
In their turn, those enormously expansive lips and keen brown eyes express contentment, doubt, fear and terror; affection, disapproval, jealousy, anger, rage; hunger and satiety; lonesomeness and illness.
The lips of the chimpanzee afford that animal several perfectly distinct expressions of the individual's mind and feelings.
While it is not possible to offer a description of each which will certainly be recognizable to the reader, the two extremes will at least be appreciated.
When coaxing for food, or attention, the lips are thrust far out beyond the teeth, and formed into a funnel with the small end outermost.
When the chimpanzee flies into a rage at some real or fancied offense, the snarling lips are drawn back, and far up and down, until the teeth and gums are fully exposed in a ghastly threat of attack.
At the same time, the voice gives forth shrill shrieks of rage, correctly represented by the syllable "Ee-ee-ee!
", prolonged, and repeated with great force, three or four times.
On such occasions as the latter, the offending party must look out for himself, or he may be roughly handled.
The voice of the chimpanzee is strong, clear, and in captivity it is very much in evidence.
Two of its moderate tones are almost musical.
It is heard when the animal says, coaxingly, "Who'-oe!
Who'-oe!"
A dozen times a day, our large specimens indulge in spells of loud yelling, purely for their own amusement.
Their strident cry sounds like "Hoo-hoo-hoo-hoo!
_Wah'_-hoo!
_Wah'_-hoo!
Hoo'-hoo!
_Wah_-h-h-h!
_Wah_-h-h!"
The second combination, "Wah-hoo," consists of two sounds, four notes apart.
It is with their voices that chimpanzees first manifest their pleasure at seeing cherished friends of the human species, or their anger.
Their recognition, and their exuberant joy on such occasions, is quite as apparent to every observer as are the manifestations of welcome of demonstrative human beings.
Like all other groups of species, the apes of various genera now living vary widely in their mentalities.
The chimpanzee has the most alert and human-like mind but with less speed the orang-utan is a good second.
The average captive gorilla, if judged by existing standards for ape mentality, is a poor third in the anthropoid scale, below the chimp and orang; but since the rise of Major Penny's family-pet gorilla, named John, we must revise all our former views of that species, and concede exceptions.
In studying the mental status of the primates I attach great importance to the work and results of the professional trainers who educate animals for stage performances.
If the trainer does not know which are the brightest species of apes, baboons and monkeys, then who does?
Their own fortunes depend upon their estimate of comparative mentality in the primates.
Fortunately for our purposes, the minds of the most intelligent and capable apes, baboons, and monkeys have been partially developed and exploited by stage trainers, and to a far less extent by keepers in zoological parks.
Some wonderful results have been achieved, and the best of these have been seen by the public in theatres, in traveling shows and in zoological parks.
All these performances have greatly interested me, because they go so far as measures of mental capacity.
I wish to make it clear that I take them very seriously.
[Illustration with caption: PORTRAIT OF A HIGH-CASTE CHIMPANZEE "Baldy" was an animal of fine intelligence and originality in thought.
He was a natural comedian] While many of the acts of trained animals are due to their power of mimicry and are produced by imitation rather than by original thought, even their imitative work reveals a breadth of intelligence, a range of memory and of activity and precision in thought and in energy which no logical mind can ignore.
To say that a chimpanzee who can swing through thirty or forty different acts "does not think" and "does not reason," is to deny the evidence of the human senses, and fall outside the bounds of human reason.
Training Apes for Performances.
As will appear in its own chapter, there is nothing at all mysterious in the training of apes.
The subject must be young, and pliant in mind, and of cheerful and kind disposition.
The poor subjects are left for cage life.
The trainer must possess intelligence of good quality, infinite patience and tireless industry.
Furthermore, the stage properties must be ample.
An outfit of this kind can train any ape that is mentally and physically a good subject.
Of course in every animal species, wild or domestic, there are individuals so dull and stupid that it is inexpedient to try to educate them.
The chimpanzee Suzette who came to us direct from the vaudeville stage performed every summer in her open-air "arena cage," until she entered motherhood, which put an end to her stage work.
She was a brilliant "trick" bicycle rider.
She could stand upright on a huge wooden ball, and by expert balancing and foot-work roll it up a steep incline, down a flight of stairs, and land it safely upon the stage, without once losing her balance or her control.
She was entirely at home on roller skates, and when taken out upon the pavement of Baird Court she would go wildly careering around the large grass plat at high speed.
All the above acts were acrobatic feats that called for original thought and action, and were such as no dull mind and body could exert.
All the training skill in the world could not take a machine and teach it to ride a bicycle through a collection of bottles, and an intelligent ape is a million years from being a "machine in fur and feathers."
More than once I have been astounded by the performances of apes on the stage.
Mr. J. S. Edwards' orang-utan Joe was a very capable animal, and his performances were wonderful.
He could use a hammer in driving nails, and a screwdriver in inserting and extracting screws, with wonderful dexterity.
The most remarkable chimpanzee performance that I ever saw was given in a New York theatre in 1909.
The star actor was a fine male animal about six years old, called Peter.
I made a complete record of his various acts, and the program was as follows PERFORMANCE OF PETER, A CHIMPANZEE Stage properties: a suit of clothes, shoes, chair, table, bed, bureau, hatrack, candle, cigarette, match, cuspidor, roller skates, bottles, flag, inclined plane and steps; plate, napkin, cup, spoon, teapot.
As Peter entered, he bowed to the audience, took off his cap and hung it upon a hatrack.
He went to the table, seated himself in the chair, unfolded and put on a napkin, and with a string fastened it in place under his chin.
With a fork he speared some slices of banana and ate them.
Into his tumbler he poured liquid from a bottle, drank, then corked the bottle.
Next, he poured tea into a cup, put in sugar and cream, took tea from the spoon, then drank from the cup.
After that he took a toothpick and used it elaborately.
Striking a match he lit a cigarette, and smoked.
In perfect man- fashion he took the cigarette between his fingers, gave his keeper a light, smoked again, and blew puffs of smoke first from one corner of his mouth and then the other.
Then he elaborately spat into the cuspidor.
Next in order he went to the bureau, cleaned his teeth with a tooth-brush, brushed his hair on both sides, looked into the mirror and powdered his face.
Finally he bit a coin and put it on the keeper's plate as a tip.
He pulled off his coat, took off his cuffs and vest, and thus half undressed he joyously danced about, beating a tambourine.
Then he removed his shirt, trousers, shoes, garters and socks.
Lighting his candle he walked to his bed, blew out the candle and went to bed.
Very soon he rose, put on his trousers and a pair of roller skates and playfully pursued a young woman who ran before him.
His use of the roller skates was excellent.
The stage was cleared of furniture, and a bicycle was brought out.
He mounted it and started off, at the first trial, and swiftly rode around the stage about fifteen times.
While riding he took off his cap and waved it.
He rode up an inclined plane and down four steps without falling off, repeating for an encore,--but here he became peeved about something.
Five bottles were set in a figure 8, and he rode between them several times.
At last he took up a bottle and drank out of it.
Then he drank out of a tumbler, all while riding.
After much flag- waving and swift riding, Peter stopped at the center of the stage, dismounted, bowed, clapped his hands vigorously and retired.
Peter's performance was remarkable because of the great length of it, the absolute skill and precision of it, and the animal's easy mastery of every situation.
There was a notable absence of hesitations and mistakes, and of visible direction.
The trainer seemed to do nothing save to assist with the stage properties, just as an assistant helps any acrobat through the property business of his act.
If any commands or signs were given, the audience was not aware of it.
Later on I learned that sometimes Peter did not perform with such spirit, and required some urging to be prompt.
The trainer was kept hustling to keep up with his own duties.
The animal seemed to remember, and I believe he did remember, the sequence of a performance of _fifty-six separate acts!_ When I witnessed Peter's performance in New York, saw the length of it and noted the immense amount of nervous energy that each performance used up, I made the prediction that he could not for one year endure such a strain.
It was reported to me that he died nine months from that time.
In October, 1909, when Peter went to Philadelphia, he was frequently and closely studied and observed by Dr. Lightner Witmer, professor of psychology at the University of Pennsylvania, and his mentality was tested at the laboratory of the University.
Dr. Witmer's conclusions, as set forth in a paper in the December (1909) issue of the _Psychological Clinic,_ are of very great interest.
He approached Peter's first performance in a skeptical frame of mind.
I gladly waive the opportunity to express my own views regarding Peter in order to put upon the stand a more competent witness.
Hear Dr. Witmer: "As I entered the theatre," he says, "my feelings were commingled interest and doubt.
My doubts were bred from knowledge of the difficulty of judging the intelligence of an animal from a stage performance.
So-called educated horses and even educated seals and fleas have made their appeal in large number to the credulity of the public.
Can any animal below man be educated in the proper sense of the word?
Or is the animal mind susceptible of nothing more than a mechanical training, and only given the specious counterfeit of an educated intelligence when under the direct control of the trainer?
"Since that day I have seen Peter in five public performances, have tested him at my psychological clinic and privately on three occasions.
I now believe that in a very real sense the animal is himself giving the stage performance.
He knows what he is doing, he delights in it, he varies it from time to time, he understands the succession of tricks which are being called for, he is guided by word of mouth without any signal open or concealed, and the function of his trainer is exercised mainly to steady and control.
"I am prepared to accept the statement of his trainers, Mr. and Mrs. McArdle, that Peter's proficiency is not so much the result of training as of downright self-education."
Peter was put through many of the tests which Dr. Witmer uses for the study of backward children.
He performed many of these tests in a very satisfactory manner.
He was able to string beads the first time he tried it.
He put pegs in the ordinary kindergarten pegging board.
He opened and closed a very difficult lock.
He used hammer and screw driver, and distinguished without any mistake between nails and screws.
A peculiar kind of hammer was given to him in order to fool him, but Peter was not fooled.
He felt both ends of the hammer and used the flat end instead of the round end.
Showing his initiative during the tests, Peter got away from those who were watching him and darted for a washstand, quickly turned the faucet and put his mouth to the spigot and secured a drink before he was snatched away by his trainers.
He understood language and followed instructions without signs.
He was able to say "mamma," and Doctor Witmer taught him in five minutes to give the sound of "p." The most remarkable performance was making the letter "w" on the blackboard, in which he imitated Doctor Witmer's movements exactly, and reproduced a fair copy of the letter.
The last four paragraphs reproduced above have been copied from an article which appeared in the Philadelphia _Public Ledger_ on December 17, 1909.
Dr. Witmer declares that the study of this ape's mind is a subject fit, not for the animal psychologist, but for the child psychologist.
Suzette's Failure in Maternal Instinct.
As a closing contribution to our observations on the chimpanzee, I must record a tragic failure in maternal instinct, as well as in general intelligence, in a chimpanzee.
In 1919 our two fine eight-year old chimpanzees, Boma and Suzette, were happily married.
It was a genuine love match, and strictly monogamous at that; for while big Fanny Chimp in the cage next door to Boma loved Boma and openly courted him, he was outrageously indifferent to her, and even scorned her.
After seven months of gestation, a very good baby was born to Suzette, quite naturally and successfully.
Boma's shouts of excitement and delight carried half a mile throughout the Park.
Everything looked most auspicious for the rearing of a wonderful cage-bred and cage-born chimpanzee, the second one ever born in captivity.
Instead of carrying her infant astride her hip, as do orang mothers, and the coolie women of India, Suzette astonished us beyond measure by tucking it _into her groin,_ between her thigh and her abdomen, head outward.
It was a fine place,--warm and soft,--but not good when overdone!
When Suzette walked, as she freely did, she held up the leg responsible for the baby, to hold it securely in place, and walked upon the other foot and her two hands.
About all this there was one very bad thing.
The baby was perfectly helpless!
As long as the mother chose to keep it in her groin prison, it could not get free.
Suzette was completely isolated, kept absolutely quiet, and every chance was given her to go on with the functions of motherhood.
Her breasts contained plenty of milk, and the flow was due to start on the second day after the infant's arrival.
Day and night the baby was jealously confined in that massive and powerful groin,--and _under too much pressure!_ When the baby cried, and kicked, and struggled to get free, Suzette would nervously rearrange her straw bed, carefully pick from the tiny fingers every straw that they had clutched, and settle down again.
If the struggle was soon renewed, Suzette would change the infant over to the other groin, and close upon it as before.
Sleeping or waking, walking, sitting or lying down, she held it there.
If we attempted to touch the infant, the mother instantly became savage and dangerous.
Not one human finger was permitted to touch it.
For hours, and for days, we anxiously watched for nursing to begin; but in vain.
At last we became almost frantic from the spectacle of the infant being slowly starved to death because the mother did not realize that it needed her milk, and that she alone could promote nursing.
_Her mother instinct utterly failed to supply the link that alone could connect infancy to motherhood, and furnish life._ Of course this failure was due to poor Suzette's artificial life, and unnatural surroundings.
Had she been all alone, in the depths of a tropical forest, Nature would have proceeded along her usual lines.
But in our Primate House, Suzette felt that her infant was surrounded by a host of strange enemies, from whom it must be strongly and persistently _guarded and defended._ That was the idea that completely dominated her mind, ruled out all human help, and blocked the main process of nature.
During the eight days that the infant lived, it was able to reach her breast and nurse only once, for about one minute; and then back it went to its prison, where it died from sheer lack of nourishment.
In 1920, that same history was repeated, except that on this occasion our Veterinary Surgeon, Dr. W. Reid Blair, worked (on the fifth day) for seven hours without intermission to stupefy Suzette with chloroform, or other opiates, sufficiently to make it possible to remove the baby without a fight with the mother and its certain death.
Owing to her savage temper all the work had to be done between iron bars, to keep from losing hands or arms, and the handicap on the human hand was too great.
Even when Suzette had received chloroform for an hour and twenty minutes, and was regarded as _half dead,_ at the first touch of a human finger upon her thigh she instantly aroused and sprang up, raging and ready for battle.
The whole effort failed.
To rope Suzette and attempt to control her by force would have been sheer folly, or worse.
In such a struggle the infant would have been torn to pieces.
The second one died as the first one did, and for an awful week we were unable to gain possession of the decomposing cadaver.
Suzette knew that something was wrong, and she realized the awful odor, but that idea of defense of her offspring obscured all others.
In maintaining her possession of that infant, nothing could surpass the cunning of that ape mother.
Will we ever succeed in outwitting her, and in getting one of her babies alive into a baby incubator?
Who can say?
X THE TRUE MENTAL STATUS OF THE GORILLA The true mental status of the gorilla was discovered in 1919 and 1920, at 15 Sloane Street, London, by Major Rupert Penny, of the Royal Air Service, and his young relative, Miss Alyse Cunningham.
Prior to that time, through various combinations of retarding circumstances, no living gorilla had ever been placed and kept in an environment calculated to develop and display the real mental calibre of the gorilla mind.
It seems that an exhibition cage, in a zoological park or garden thronged with visitors, actually tends to the suppression, or even the complete extinguishment, of true gorilla character.
The atmosphere of the footlights and the stage in which the chimpanzee delights and thrives is to the gorilla repulsive and unbearable.
Judging by Major Penny's "John," the gorilla wishes to live in a high-class human family, in a modern house, and be treated like a human being!
It is now definitely recognized by us, and also by our colleagues in the London Zoological Gardens, that gorillas can not live long and thrive on public exhibition, before great crowds of people, and that it is folly to insist upon trying to compel them to do so.
The male individual that lived several years in the Breslau Zoological Garden and attained the age of seven years was a striking exception.
We have had two gorillas at our Park, one of which, a female named Dinah, arrived in good health, and lived with us eleven and one- half months.
Her mind was dull and hopelessly unresponsive.
She learned next to nothing, and she did nothing really interesting.
Other captive gorillas I have known have been equally morose and unresponsive, and lived fewer months than Dinah.
It is because of such animals as Dinah that for fifty years the mental status of the gorilla species has been under a cloud.
Until now it has been much misunderstood and unappreciated.
Of the few gorillas that have been seen in England and America, I think that all save John have been so morose and unresponsive, _and so undeveloped by companionship and training_, that mentally they have been rated far below the chimpanzee and orang.
Our own Dinah was no exception to the rule.
Personally she was a stupid little thing, even when in excellent health.
Her most pronounced and exasperating stupidities were shown in her refusal to eat, or to taste, strange food, even when very hungry.
Any ape that does not know enough to eat a fine, ripe banana, and will only mince away at the _inner lining_ of the banana skin, is an unmitigated numskull, and hardly fit to live.
Dinah was all that, and more.
But, alas!
We have seen a few stupid human children who obstinately refused even to taste certain new and unknown kinds of food, because they "know" they will not like them!
So Dinah was not alone in her childish folly.
At last a chain of circumstances placed an intellectual and sensible gorilla, two years of age, in the hands of a family specially fitted by education and home surroundings to develop its mind and its manners.
The results of those efforts have given to the gorilla an entirely new mental status.
Thanks to the enterprise and diligence of Major Rupert Penny and Miss Cunningham in purchasing and caring for a sick and miserable young male gorilla,--a most hazardous risk,--a new chapter in wild-animal psychology now is to be written.
In December, 1918, "John Gorilla" was purchased in a London department store, out of a daily atmosphere heated to _85 degrees_, and a nightly condition of solitude and terror.
From that awful state it was taken to live in Major Penny's comfortable apartments.
John was seriously ill.
He was in a "rickety" condition, and he weighed only 32 pounds.
With a pure atmosphere, kept at 65 degrees only, and amid good surroundings, he soon became well.
He attained such robust health and buoyant spirits that in March, 1921, he stood 40 1/2 inches high and weighed 112 pounds.
At my solicitation Miss Cunningham wrote out for me the very remarkable personal history of that wonderful animal,--apparently the most wonderful gorilla ever observed in captivity.
It is a clear, straightforward and convincing record, and not one of its statements is to be for one moment doubted.
While it is too long to reproduce here in its entirety, I will present a condensation of it, in Miss Cunningham's own words that will record the salient facts,--with no changes save in arrangement.
Miss Cunningham says: LONELINESS.
"We soon found it was impossible to leave him alone at night, because he shrieked every night, and nearly all night, from loneliness and fear.
This we found he had done in the store where he lived before coming to us.
He always began to cry directly he saw the assistants putting things away for the night.
We found that this loneliness at night was trying on his health and appetite.
As soon as possible my nephew had his bed made up every night in the room adjoining the cage, with the result that John was quite happy, and began to grow and put on fat.
TREATMENT.
"I fed him, washed his hands, face and feet twice a day, and brushed and combed his hair,--which he would try to do himself whenever he got hold of the brush or comb.
He soon got to like all this.
TRAINING.
"My next idea was to teach him to be strictly clean in his habits.
It was my ambition to be able to have him upstairs in our house as an ordinary member of the household.
I taught him first as a child is taught and handled.
This took some time.
At first I could not make him understand what we expected of him, even though I always petted him and gave him grapes (of which he was especially fond), but I think at first he imagined that this treatment was a punishment.
At first, without other reasons, he would roll on the floor and shriek, but directly he understood what was expected of him he soon learned, and began to behave excellently.
"This training occupied quite six weeks.
About February, 1919, we took him out of his cage, and allowed him the freedom of the house.
Thereafter he would run upstairs to the bathroom of his own accord, turning the doorknob of whatever room he was in, and also opening the door of the bathroom....
He would get out of bed in the night by himself, go back to bed, and pull the blankets over himself quite neatly.
FOOD.
"John's appetite seemed to tire of foods very quickly.
The only thing he stuck to was milk, which he liked best when warmed.
We began by giving him a quart a day, rising to three and one-half quarts a day.
I found that he preferred to choose his own food, so I used to prepare for him several kinds, such as bananas, oranges, apples, grapes, raisins, currants, dates and any small fruits in season, such as raspberries or strawberries, _all of which he liked to have warmed!_ "These displays I placed on a high shelf in the kitchen, where he could get them with difficulty.
I think that he thought himself very clever when he stole anything.
He never would eat anything stale.
He was extremely fond of fresh lemon jelly, but he never would touch it after the second day.
He loved roses, _to eat_, more than anything.
The more beautiful they were, the more he liked them, but he never would eat faded roses.
He never cared much for nuts of any other kind than baked peanuts, save walnuts.
I found that nuts gave him dreadful spells of indigestion.
USE OF TOOLS.
"He knew what hammers and chisels were for, but for obvious reasons we never encouraged him in anything to do with carpentry.
With cocoanuts he was very funny.
He knew that they had to be broken, and he would try to break them on the floor.
When he found he couldn't manage that, he would bring the nut to one of us and try to make us understand what he wished.
If we gave him a hammer he would try to use it on the nut, and on not being able to manage that, he would give back to us both the hammer and the cocoanut.
GAMES AND PLAY.
"We never taught him any tricks; he simply acquired knowledge himself.
A game he was very fond of was to pretend he was blind, shutting his eyes very tightly, and running around the room knocking against tables and chairs.
.
.
.
We found that exercise was the thing he required to keep him in health, and my nephew used to give him plenty of that by playing hide and seek with him in the morning before breakfast, and in the evening before dinner,--up and down stairs, in and out of all the rooms.
He simply loved that game, and would giggle and laugh while being chased....
If he saw that a stranger was at all nervous about him, he loved running past him, and giving him a smack on the leg,--and you could see him grin as he did so.
"A thing he greatly enjoyed was to stand on the top rail of his bed and jump on the springs, head over heels, just like a child.
CAUTION.
"He was very cautious.
He would never run into a dark room without first turning on the light.
FEAR.
"John seemed to realize danger for other people in high places, for if anyone looked out of a high window he always pushed them away if he were at the window himself, but if he was away from it he would run and pull them back.
.
.
.
He was very much afraid of full-grown sheep, cows and horses, but he loved colts, calves and lambs, proving to us that he recognized youth.
WOODS VS. FIELDS.
"We found he did not like fields or open country, but he was very happy in a garden, or in woods.
.
.
.
He always liked nibbling twigs, and to eat the green buds of trees.
TABLE MANNERS.
"His table manners were really very good.
He always sat at the table, and whenever a meal was ready, would pull his own chair up to his place.
He did not care to eat a great deal, but he especially liked to drink water out of a tumbler.
.
.
.
He was the least greedy of all the animals I have ever seen.
He never would snatch anything, and always ate very slowly.
He always drank a lot of water, which he would always get himself whenever he wanted it by turning on a tap.
Strange to say, he always turned off the water when he had finished drinking.
PLAYING TO THE GALLERY.
"John seemed to think that everyone was delighted to see him, and he would throw up the window whenever he was permitted.
If he found the sash locked he would unfasten it, and when a big crowd had collected outside he would clap his chest and his hands.
[Footnote: In the summer of 1920 a globe-trotter just arrived from England excitedly reported to me: "While driving along a street in London _I saw a live gorilla_ in the upper window of an apartment.
It was a _real gorilla;_ and it clapped its hands at us as we looked!
Now _what_ did it all mean?"
Fortunately I was able to explain it.]
PUNISHMENT AND REPENTANCE.
"We made one very great mistake with John.
His cage was used as a punishment, with the result that we never could leave him there alone, for he would shriek all the time.
.
.
.
Now, a stick was the one thing that our gorilla would not stand from anyone, save Major Penny and myself.
Presently we found out that the only way to deal with him was to tell him that he was very naughty, and push him away from us; when he would roll on the floor and cry, and be very-repentant, holding one's ankles, and putting his head on our feet.
AFFECTION FOR A CHILD.
"He was especially fond of my little niece, three years old.
John and she used to play together for hours, and he seemed to understand what she wanted him to do.
If she ever cried, and her mother would not go and pick her up, John would always try and nip the mother, or give her a smack with the full weight of his hand, evidently thinking she was the cause of the child's tears.
A SENSE OF GOOD ORDER.
"He loved to take everything out of a wastepaper basket and strew the contents all over the room, after which, when told to do so he would pick up everything and put it all back, but looking very bored all the while.
If the basket was very full he would push it all down very carefully, to make room for more.
He would always put things back when told to do so, such as books from a bookshelf or things from a table.
[Illustration caption: THE GORILLA WITH THE WONDERFUL MIND Owned by Major Rupert Penny, educated by Miss Alyse Cunningham, London, 1918-1921] TWO CASES OF ORIGINAL THOUGHT.
(1) "One day we were going out, for which I was sitting ready dressed, when John wished to sit in my lap.
My sister, Mrs. Penny, said: 'Don't let him.
He will spoil your dress.'
"As my dress happened to be a light one I pushed him away, and said, 'No!'
He at once lay on the floor and cried just like a child, for about a minute.
Then he rose, looked round the room, found a newspaper, went and picked it up, spread it on my lap and climbed up.
This was quite the cleverest thing I ever saw him do.
_Even those who saw it said they would not have believed it had they not seen it themselves!_ Both my nephews, (Major Penny and Mr. E. C. Penny), his wife and my sister (Mrs. Penny) were in the room, and can testify to the correctness of the above record.
(2) "Another clever thing John did, although I suspect this was due more to instinct that to downright cleverness.
A piece of filet beefsteak had just come from the butcher.
Inasmuch as occasionally I gave him a small mouthful of raw beef, a small piece of the coarser part of the steak was cut off, and I gave it to him.
He tasted it, then gravely handed it back to me.
Then he took my hand and put it on the finer part of the meat.
From that I cut off a tiny piece, gave it to him, and he ate it.
When my nephew came home he wouldn't believe it, so I tried it again, with the same result, except that then he did not even attempt to eat the coarser meat."
* * * * * Concerning Miss Cunningham's wonderful story, I wish to state that I believe all of it,--because there is no reason to do otherwise!
It sets a new mark in gorilla lore, and it lifts a curtain from an animal mind that previously was unknown, and very generally misunderstood.
To the Doubting Thomases who will doubt some portions of Miss Cunningham's story, let me cite, by way of caution, the following history: When Du Chaillu discovered the gorilla, and came to America and England with his specimens to tell about it, he said that when a big gorilla is attacked and made angry it beats its breast, repeatedly, with its clenched fists.
The wiseacres of that day solemnly shook their heads and said: "Oh, no!
That can not be true.
No ape ever did that.
He is romancing!"
But now we know that this breast-beating and chest-clapping habit is to a gorilla a common-place performance, even in captivity.
Sometimes there are more things in heaven and earth than are dreamt of in all our philosophy.
XI THE MIND OF THE ELEPHANT It was in the jungles of the Animallai Hills of southern India that I first became impressed by the mental capacity of the Indian elephant.
I saw many wild herds.
I saw elephants at work, and at one period I lived in a timber camp, consisting of working elephants and mahouts.
I saw a shrewd young elephant-driver soundly flogged for stealing an elephant, farming it out to a native timber contractor for four days, and then elaborately pretending that the animal had been "lost."
Later on I saw elephant performances in the "Greatest Show on Earth" and elsewhere, and for eighteen years I have been chief mourner over the idiosyncrasies of Gunda and Alice.
If I do not now know something about elephants, then my own case of animal intelligence is indeed hopeless.
To me it seems that the only thing necessary to establish the elephant as an animal of remarkable intellect and power of original reasoning is to set forth the unadorned facts that lie ready to hand.
Cuvier recorded the opinion that in sagacity the elephant in no way excels the dog and some other species of carnivora.
Sir Emerson Tennent, even after some study of the elephant, was disposed to award the palm for intelligence to the dog, but only "from the higher degree of development consequent on his more intimate domestication and association with man."
In the mind of G. P. Sanderson we fear that familiarity with the elephant bred a measure of contempt; and this seems very strange.
He says: "Its reasoning faculties are undoubtedly far below those of the dog, and possibly of other animals; and in matters beyond its daily experience it evinces no special discernment."
To me it seems that all three of those opinions are off the target.
The dog is not a wild, untrammeled animal; and neither dogs, cats nor savage men evince any special discernment "beyond the range of their daily experience."
Moreover, there are some millions of tame men of whom the same may be said with entire safety.
Very often the question is asked: "Is the African elephant equal in intelligence and training capacity to the Indian species?"
To this we must answer: Not proven.
We do not know.
The African species never has been tried out on the same long and wide basis as the Indian.
Many individual African elephants, very intelligent, have been trained, successfully, and have given good accounts of themselves.
For my own part I am absolutely sure that when taken in hand at the same age, and trained on the same basis as the Indian species, the African elephant will be found mentally quite the equal of the Indian, and just as available for work or performances.
No negro tribe really likes to handle elephants and train them.
The Indian native loves elephants, and enjoys training them and working with them.
It is these two conditions that have left the African elephant far behind the procession.
The African elephant belongs to the great Undeveloped Continent.
He has been, and he still is, mercilessly pursued and slaughtered for his tusks.
All the existing species of African elephants are going down and out before the ivory hunters.
We fear that they will all be dead one hundred years from this time, or even less.
A century hence, when the last _africanus_ has gone to join the mammoth and the mastodon, his well protected wild congener in India still will be devouring his four hundred pounds of green fodder per day, and the tame ones will be performing to amuse the swarming human millions of this overcrowded world.
In the minds of our elephant keepers, familiarity with elephants has bred just the reverse of contempt.
Both Thuman and Richards are quite sure that elephants are the wisest of all wild animals.
Despite the very great amount of trouble made for Keeper Thuman by Gunda, the Indian, and Kartoum, the African, Thuman grows enthusiastic over the shrewdness of their "cussedness."
He is particularly impressed by their skill in opening chain shackles, and unfastening the catches and locks of doors and gates.
And really, Kartoum's ingenuity in finding out how to open latches and bolts is almost inexhaustible, as well as marvelous.
Keeper Richards declares that our late African pygmy elephant, Congo, was the wisest animal he ever has known.
I have elsewhere referred to his ability in shutting his outside door.
Richards taught him to accept coins from visitors, deposit them in a box, then pull a cord to ring a bell, one pull for each coin represented.
The keeper devised four different systems of intimate signals by which he could tell Congo to stop at the right point, and all these were so slight that no one ever detected them.
One was by a voice-given cue, another by a hand motion, and a third was by an inclination of the body.
Keeper Richards relates that Congo would go out in his yard, collect a trunkful of peanuts from visitors, bring them inside and secretly cache them in a corner behind his feed box.
Then he would go out for more graft peanuts, bring them in, hide them and proceed to eat the first lot.
There are millions of men who do not know what it is to conserve something that can be eaten.
In this discussion of the intellectual powers and moral qualities of the elephant I will confine myself to my own observations on _Elephas indicus_, except where otherwise stated.
A point to which we ask special attention is that in endeavoring to estimate the mental capacity of the elephant, we will base no general conclusions upon _any particularly intelligent individual_, as all mankind is tempted to do in discussions of the intelligence of the dog, the cat, the horse, parrot and ape.
On the contrary, it is our desire to reveal the mental capacity of _every elephant living_, tame or wild, except the few individuals with abnormal or diseased minds.
It is not to be shown how successfully _an_ elephant has been taught by man, but how _all_ elephants in captivity have been taught, and the mental capacity of _every_ elephant.
Under the head of intellectual qualities we have first to consider the elephant's POWERS OF INDEPENDENT OBSERVATIONS, AND REASONING FROM CAUSE TO EFFECT While many wonderful stories are related of the elephant's sagacity and independent powers of reasoning, it must be admitted that a greater number of more wonderful anecdotes are told on equally good authority of dogs.
But the circumstances in the case are wholly to the advantage of the universal dog, and against the rarely seen elephant.
While the former roams at will through his master's premises, through town and country, mingling freely with all kinds of men and domestic animals, with unlimited time to lay plans and execute them, the elephant in captivity is chained to a stake, with no liberty of action whatever aside from begging with his trunk, eating and drinking.
His only amusement is in swaying his body, swinging one foot, switching his tail, and (in a zoological park) looking for something that he can open or destroy.
Such a ponderous beast cannot be allowed to roam at large among human beings, and the working elephant never leaves his stake and chain except under the guidance of his mahout.
There is no means of estimating the wonderful powers of reasoning that captive elephants might develop if they could only enjoy the freedom accorded to all dogs except the blood-hound, bull-dog and a few others.
In the jungles of India the writer frequently has seen wild elephants reconnoitre dangerous ground by means of a scout or spy; communicate intelligence by signs; retreat in orderly silence from a lurking danger, and systematically march, in single file, like the jungle tribes of men.
Once having approached to within fifty yards of the stragglers of a herd of about thirty wild elephants, which was scattered over about four acres of very open forest and quietly feeding, two individuals of the herd on the side nearest us suddenly suspected danger.
One of them elevated his trunk, with the tip bent forward, and smelled the air from various points of the compass.
A moment later an old elephant left the herd and started straight for our ambush, scenting the air with upraised trunk as he slowly and noiselessly advanced.
We instantly retreated, unobserved and unheard.
The elephant advanced until he reached the identical spot where we had a moment before been concealed.
He paused, and stood motionless as a statue for about two minutes, then wheeled about and quickly but noiselessly rejoined the herd.
In less than half a minute the whole herd was in motion, heading directly away from us, and moving very rapidly, but _without the slightest noise_.
The huge animals simply vanished like shadows into the leafy depths of the forest.
Before proceeding a quarter of a mile, the entire herd formed in single file and continued strictly in that order for several miles.
Like the human dwellers in the jungle, the elephants know that the easiest and most expeditious way for a large body of animals to traverse a tangled forest is for the leader to pick the way, while all the others follow in his footsteps.
In strong contrast with the stealthy and noiseless manner in which elephants steal away from a lurking danger, or an ambush discovered, from an open attack accompanied with the noise of fire-arms they rush away at headlong speed, quite regardless of the noise they make.
On one occasion a herd which I was designing to attack, and had approached to within forty yards, as its members were feeding in some thick bushes, discovered my presence and retreated so silently that they had been gone five minutes before I discovered what their sudden quietude really meant.
In this instance, as in several others, the still alarm was communicated by silent signals, or sign-language.
At the Zoological Park we reared an African pygmy elephant (_Elephas pumilio_).
When his slender little tusks grew to eighteen inches in length he made some interesting uses of them.
Once when the keepers wished to lead him upon our large platform scales, the trembling of the platform frightened him.
He conceived the idea that it was unsafe, and therefore that he must keep off.
He backed away, halted, and refused to leave solid ground.
The men pushed him.
He backed, and trumpeted a shrill protest.
The men pushed harder, and forced him forward.
Trumpeting his wild alarm and his protest against what he regarded as murder, he fell upon his knees and drove his tusks into the earth, quite up to his mouth, to anchor himself firmly to the solid ground.
It was pathetic, but also amusing.
When Congo finally was pushed upon the scales and weighed, he left the trembling instrument of torture with an air of disgust and disapproval that was quite as eloquent as words.
On several occasions when taken out for exercise in the park, he endeavored to hinder the return to quarters by anchoring himself to Mother Earth.
Congo once startled us by his knowledge of the usefulness of doors.
For a time he was kept in a compartment that had an outside door running sidewise on a trolley track, and controlled by two hanging chains, one to close it and one to open it.
Each chain had on its end a stout iron ring for a handle.
One chilly morning when I went to see Congo, I asked his keeper to open his door, so that he could go out.
The keeper did so, by pulling the right hand chain.
The moment the draft of chilly outer air struck Congo, who stood in the centre of his stall facing me, he impatiently wheeled about, walked up to the left hand chain, grabbed it with his trunk, slipped the ring over one of his tusks, then inclined his head downward and with an irritated tug pulled the door shut with a spiteful slam.
"Open it again," I said to the keeper.
He did so, and in the same way, but with a visible increase in irritation, Congo closed it in the same manner as before.
Again the keeper opened the door, and this time, with a real exhibition of temper Congo again thrust the ring over his tusk, and brought the door shut with a resounding bang.
It was his regular habit to close that door, or to open it, when he felt like more air or less air; and who is there who will say that the act was due to "instinct" in a jungle-bred animal, or anything else than original thought.
The ring on his tusk was his own invention, as a means to a desired end.
Every elephant that we ever have had has become, through his own initiative and experimenting, an expert in unfastening the latches of doors and gates, and in untying chains and ropes.
Gunda always knew enough to attack the padlocks on his leg chains, and break them if possible.
No ordinary clevis would hold him.
When the pin was threaded at one end and screwed into its place, Gunda would work at it, hour by hour, until he would start it to unscrewing, and then his trunk-tip would do the rest.
The only clevis that he could not open was one in which a stout cotter pin was passed through the end of the clevis-pin and strongly bent.
Through reasons emanating in his own savage brain, Gunda took strong dislikes to several of our park people.
He hated Dick Richards,--the keeper of Alice.
He hated a certain messenger boy, a certain laborer, a painter and Mr. Ditmars.
Toward me he was tolerant, and never rushed at me to kill me, as he always did to his pet aversions.
He stood in open fear of his own keeper, Walter Thuman, until he had studied out a plan to catch him off his guard and "get him."
Then he launched his long-contemplated attack, and Thuman was almost killed.
Our present (1921) male African elephant, Kartoum, is not so hostile toward people, but his insatiable desire is to break and to smash all of his environment that can be bent or broken.
His ingenuity in finding ways to damage doors and gates, and to bend or to break steel beams, is amazing.
His greatest feat consisted in breaking squarely in two, by pushing with his head, a 90-pound steel railroad iron used as the top bar of his fence.
He knows the mechanism of the latch of the ponderous steel door between his two box stalls, and nothing but a small pin that only human fingers can manipulate suffices to thwart his efforts to control the latch.
Kartoum has gone over every inch of surface of his two apartments, his doors, gates and fences, to find something that he can break or damage.
The steel linings of his apartment walls, originally five feet high, we have been compelled to extend upward to a height of nine feet, to save the brick walls from being battered and disfigured.
He has searched his steel fences throughout, in order to find their weakest points, and concentrate his attacks upon them.
If the sharp-pointed iron spikes three inches long that are set all over his doors are perfectly solid, he respects them, but if one is the least bit loose in its socket, he works at it until he finally breaks it off.
I invite any Doubting Thomas who thinks that Kartoum does not "think" and "reason" to try his own thinking and reasoning at inventing for Kartoum's door a latch that a keeper can easily and surely open and close at a distance of ten feet, and that will be Kartoum-proof.
As for ourselves, three or four seemingly intelligent officers and keepers, and a capable foreman of construction, have all they can do to keep ahead of that one elephant, so great is his ingenuity in thwarting our ways and means to restrain him.
In about two days of effort our elephant keepers taught Gunda to receive a coin from the hand of a visitor, or pick it off the floor, lift the lid of a high-placed cash-box, drop the coin into it and ring a bell.
This very amusing industry was kept up for several years, but finally it became so popular that it had to be discontinued.
Keeper Dick Richards easily taught Alice to blow a mouth organ, and to ring a telephone, to take the receiver off its hook and hold it to her ear and listen.
For years Alice has rendered, every summer, valuable services of a serious nature in carrying children and other visitors around her yard, and only once or twice has she shown a contrary or obstinate spirit.
Tame elephants never tread on the feet of their attendants or knock them down by accident; or, at least, no instances of the kind have come to my knowledge.
The elephant's feet are large, his range of vision is circumscribed, and his extreme and wholly voluntary solicitude for the safety of his human attendants can not be due to anything else than independent reasoning.
The most intelligent dog is apt to greet his master by planting a pair of dirty paws against his coat or trousers.
The most sensible carriage-horse is liable to step on his master's foot or crowd him against a wall in a moment of excitement; but even inside the keddah, with wild elephants all about, and a captive elephant hemmed in by three or four tame animals, the noosers safely work under the bodies and between the feet of the tame elephant until the feet of the captive are tied.
All who have witnessed the tying of captives in a keddah wherein a whole wild herd has been entrapped, testify to the uncanny human- like quality of the intelligence displayed by the tame elephants who assist in tying, leading out and subjugating the wild captives.
They enter into the business with both spirit and understanding, and as occasion requires will deceitfully cajole or vigorously punish a troublesome captive.
Sir Emerson Tennent asserts that the tame elephants display the most perfect conception of every movement, both of the object to be attained and the means to accomplish it.
Memory in the Elephant.
So far as memory may be regarded as an index of an animal's mental capacity, the weight of evidence is most convincingly creditable to the elephant.
As a test of memory in an animal, we hold that a trained performance surpasses all others.
During the past forty years millions of people have witnessed in either Barnum's or Ringling Brothers' shows, or in the two combined, an imitation military drill performed by from twelve to twenty elephants which in animals of any other species would be considered a remarkable performance.
The following were the commands given by one trainer, understood and remembered by each elephant, and executed without any visible hesitation or mistake.
These we will call the Accomplishments of Performing Elephants.
1.
Fall in line.
2.
Roll-call.
(As each elephant's name is called, he takes his place in the ranks).
3.
Present arms.
(The trunk is uplifted, with its tip curved forward and held in that position for a short time.)
4.
Forward, march.
5.
File left, march.
6.
Right about face, march.
7.
Left about face, march.
8.
Right by twos, march.
9.
Double quick, march.
10.
Single file, march.
11.
File right.
12.
Halt.
13.
Ground arms.
(All lie down, and lie motionless.)
14.
Attention (All arise.)
15.
Shoulder arms.
(All stand up on their hind-legs.)
In all, fifteen commands were obeyed by the whole company of elephants.
It being impossible, or at least impracticable, to supply so large a number of animals with furniture and stage properties for a further universal performance, certain individuals were supplied with the proper articles when necessary for a continuation of the performance, as follows: 16.
Ringing bells.
17.
Climbing up a step-ladder.
18.
Going lame in a fore leg.
19.
Going lame in a hind leg.
20.
Stepping up on a tub turned bottom up.
[Illustration with caption: TAME ELEPHANTS ASSISTING IN TYING A WILD CAPTIVE The captive elephant is marked "C." The tame elephants have been quietly massed around him to keep him still and to give the noosers a chance to work at his legs from under the bodies of the tame elephants.
The black figures on the tame elephants are their mahouts, wrapped in blankets and lying down.
(From A. G. R. Theobald, Mysore)] 21.
Standing on a tub on right legs only.
22.
The same, on opposite legs.
23.
The same, on the fore legs only.
24.
The same, on the hind legs only.
25.
Using a fan.
26.
Turning a hand-organ.
27.
Using a handkerchief to wipe the eyes.
28.
Sitting in a chair.
29.
Kneeling, with the fore legs.
30.
Kneeling with the hind legs.
31.
Walking astride a man lying lengthwise.
32.
Stepping over a man lying down.
33.
Forming a pyramid of elephants, by using tubs of various sizes.
While it is true that not all of the acts in the latter part of this performance were performed by each one of the elephants who went through the military drill, there is no reason to doubt the entire ability of each individual to be trained to obey the whole thirty-three commands, and to remember them all accurately and without confusion.
The most astonishing feature of the performance, aside from the perfect obedience of the huge beasts, was their easy confidence and accuracy of memory.
We come now to a consideration of the Accomplishments of Working Elephants.
In all the timber-forests of southern India every captive elephant is taught to perform all the following acts and services, as I have witnessed on many occasions: 1.
To _salaam,_ or salute, by raising the trunk.
2.
To kneel, to receive a load or a passenger.
3.
When standing, to hold up a fore-foot, to serve the driver as a step in climbing to his place.
4.
To lie down to be washed, first on one side and then on the other.
5.
To open the mouth.
6.
To "hand up" any article from the ground to the reach of a person riding.
7.
To pull down an obstructing bough.
8.
To halt.
9.
To back.
10.
To pick up the end of a drag-rope and place it between the teeth.
11.
To drag a timber.
12.
To kneel and with the head turn a log over, or turn it with the tusks if any are present.
13.
To push a log into position parallel with others.
14.
To balance and carry timbers on the tusks, if possessing tusks of sufficient size.
15.
To "speak," or trumpet.
16.
To work in harness.
Every working elephant in India is supposed to possess the intelligence necessary to the performance of all the acts enumerated above at the command of his driver, either by spoken words, a pressure of the knees or feet, or a touch with the driving goad.
For the sake of generalization I have purposely excluded from this list all tricks and accomplishments which are not universally taught to working elephants.
We have seen, however, that performing elephants are capable of executing nearly double the number of acts commonly taught to the workers; and, while it is useless to speculate upon the subject, it must be admitted that, were a trainer to test an elephant's memory by ascertaining the exact number of commands it could remember and execute in rotation, the result would far exceed anything yet obtained.
For my own part, I believe it would exceed a hundred.
The performance in the circus-ring is limited by time and space, and not by the mental capacity of the elephants.
Comprehension under Training.
When we come to consider the comparative mental receptivity and comprehension of animals under man's tuition, we find the elephant absolutely unsurpassed.
On account of the fact that an elephant is about eighteen years in coming to anything like maturity, according to the Indian Government standard for working animals, it is far more economical and expeditious to catch full-grown elephants in their native jungles, and train them, than it is to breed and rear them.
About ninety per cent of all the elephants now living in captivity were caught in a wild state and tamed, and of the remainder at least eighty per cent were born in captivity of females that were gravid when captured.
It will be seen, therefore, that the elephant has derived no advantage whatever from ancestral association with man, and has gained nothing from the careful selection and breeding which, all combined, have made the collie dog, the pointer and the setter the wonderfully intelligent animals they are.
For many generations the horse has been bred for strength, for speed, or for beauty of form, but the breeding of the dog has been based _chiefly_ on his intelligence as a means to an end.
_With all his advantages, it is to be doubted whether the comprehensive faculties of the dog, even in the most exceptional individuals of a whole race, are equal to those of the adult wild elephant fresh from the jungle._ The extreme difficulty of teaching a dog _of mature age_ even the simplest thing is so well known that it has passed into a proverb: "It is hard to teach an old dog new tricks."
In other words, the conditions _must_ be favorable.
But what is the case with the elephant?
The question shall be answered by G. P. Sanderson.
In his "Wild Beasts of India," he says: "_Nor are there any elephants which can not be easily subjugated, whatever their size or age.
The largest and oldest elephants are frequently the most easily tamed, as they are less apprehensive than the younger ones._" Philosophy of the Elephant in Accepting Captivity and Making the Best of It.
The most astounding feature in the education of an elephant is the suddenness of his transition from a wild and lawless denizen of the forest to the quiet, plodding, good- tempered, and cheerful beast of draught or burden.
I call it astounding, because in comparison with what could _not_ be done with other wild animals caught when adult, no other word is adequate to express the difference.
The average wild animal caught fully grown is "a terror," and so far as training is concerned, perfectly impossible.
There takes place in the keddah, or pen of capture, a mighty struggle between the giant strength of the captive and the ingenuity of man, ably seconded by a few powerful tame elephants.
When he finds his strength utterly overcome by man's intelligence, he yields to the inevitable, and accepts the situation philosophically.
Sanderson once had a narrow escape from death while on the back of a tame elephant inside a keddah, attempting to secure a wild female.
She fought his elephant long and viciously, with the strength and courage of despair, but finally she was overcome by superior numbers.
Although her attack on Sanderson in the keddah was of the most murderous description, he states that her conduct after her defeat was most exemplary, and she never afterward showed any signs of ill-temper.
Mr. Sanderson and an elephant-driver once mounted a full-grown female elephant _on the sixth day after her capture, without even the presence of a tame animal._ Sir Emerson Tennent records an instance wherein an elephant fed from the hand on the first night of its capture, and in a very few days evinced pleasure at being patted on the head.
Such instances as the above can be multiplied indefinitely.
To what else shall they be attributed than philosophic reasoning on the part of the elephant?
The orang-utan and the chimpanzee, so often put forward as his intellectual superior, when captured alive at any other period than that of helpless infancy, are vicious, aggressive, and intractable not only for weeks and months, but for the remainder of their lives.
Orangs captured when fully adult exhibit the most tiger-like ferocity, and are wholly intractable.
If dogs are naturally superior to elephants in natural intellect, it should be as easy to tame and educate newly-caught wild dogs or wolves of mature age, as newly-caught elephants.
But, so far from this being the case, it is safe to assert that it would be _impossible_ to train even the most intelligent company of pointers, setters or collies ever got together to perform the feats accomplished with such promptness and accuracy by all regularly trained work elephants.
The successful training of all elephants up to the required working point is so fully conceded in India that the market value of an animal depends wholly upon its age, sex, build and the presence or absence of good tusks.
The animal's education is either sufficient for the buyer, or, if it is not, he knows it can be made so.
Promptness and Accuracy in the Execution of Man's Orders.
This is the fourth quality which serves as a key to the mental capacity and mental processes of an animal.
To me the most impressive feature of a performance of elephants in the circus-ring is the fact that every command uttered is obeyed with true military promptness and freedom from hesitation, and so accurately that an entire performance often is conducted and concluded without the repetition of a single command.
One by one the orders are executed with the most human-like precision and steadiness, amounting sometimes to actual nonchalance.
Human beings of the highest type scarcely could do better.
To some savage races--for example, the native Australians, the Veddahs of Ceylon, or the Jackoons of the Malay Peninsula, I believe that such a performance would be impossible, even under training.
I do not believe their minds act with sufficient rapidity and accuracy to enable a company of them to go through with such a wholly artificial performance as successfully as the elephants do.
The thoughtful observer does not need to be told that the brain of the ponderous quadruped acts, as far as it goes, with the same rapidity and precision as that of an intelligent man,--and this, too, in a performance that is wholly artificial and acquired.
In the performance of Bartholomew's horses, of which I once kept a record in detail, even the most accomplished members of his troupe often had to be commanded again and again before they would obey.
A command often was repeated for the fifth or sixth time before the desired result was obtained.
I noted particularly that not one of his horses,--which were the most perfectly trained of any ever seen by me,--was an exception to this rule, or performed his tasks with the prompt obedience and self-confidence so noticeable in _each one_ of the sixteen Barnum elephants.
The horses usually obeyed with tardiness and hesitation, and very often manifested nervousness and uncertainty.
In the mind of the elephant, e. g., _each_ elephant, there was no confusion of ideas or lapses of memory, but, on the contrary, the mental grasp on the whole subject was so secure and comprehensive that the animal felt himself the master of the situation.
I have never yet seen a performance of trained dogs which could be considered worthy of serious comparison with the accomplishments of either performing or working elephants.
In the matter of native educational capacity the dog can not on any grounds be considered the rival of the elephant.
The alleged mental superiority of the dog is based almost wholly upon his powers of independent reasoning and observation as exhibited in a state of almost perfect _freedom._ Until the elephant who has grown to maturity under man's influence, is allowed the dog's freedom to plan and execute, no conclusive comparison between them can be made.
Moral Qualities of the Elephant.
Finally, we come to a consideration of the elephant's moral qualities that have a direct bearing upon our subject.
In India, excepting the professional "rogue," the elephant bears a spotless reputation for patience, amiability and obedience.
The "rogue" is an individual afflicted with either an incorrigible disposition, or else is afflicted with insanity, either temporary or permanent.
I know of no instance on record wherein a _normal elephant_ with a _healthy mind_ has been guilty of unprovoked homicide, or even of attempting it.
I have never heard of an elephant in India so much as kicking, striking or otherwise injuring either human beings or other domestic animals.
There have been several instances, however, of persons killed by elephants which were temporarily insane, or "_must,_" and also by others permanently insane.
In America several persons have been killed in revenge for ill treatment.
In Brooklyn a female elephant once killed a civilian who burned her trunk with a lighted cigar.
It is the misfortune but not the fault of the elephant that in advanced age or by want of necessary exercise, he is liable to be attacked by _must,_ or sexual insanity, during which period he is clearly irresponsible for his acts.
So many men have been killed by elephants in this country that of late years the idea has been steadily gaining ground that elephants are naturally ill-tempered, and vicious to a dangerous extent.
Under fair conditions, nothing could be farther from the truth.
We have seen that in the hands of the "gentle Hindu" the elephant is safe and reliable, and never attacks man except under the circumstances already stated.
In this country, however, many an elephant is at the mercy of quick-tempered and sometimes revengeful showmen, who very often do not understand the temperaments of the animals under their control, and who during the traveling season are rendered perpetually ill-tempered and vindictive by reason of overwork and insufficient sleep.
With such masters as these it is no wonder that occasionally an animal rebels, and executes vengeance.
In Minneapolis in December an elephant once went on a rampage through the freezing of its ears.
I am quite convinced that an elephant could by ill treatment be driven to insanity, and I have no doubt that this has been done many times.
Our bad elephant, Gunda, was bad by nature, but finally he became afflicted with sexual insanity, for which there was no cure.
When commanded by man, the elephant will tear a criminal limb from limb, or crush him to death with his knees, or go out to battle holding a sword in his trunk.
He will, when told to do so, attack his kind with fury and persistence; but in the course of many hours, and even days, spent in watching wild herds, I never yet saw a single individual show any signs of impatience or ill-temper toward his fellows.
It is safe to say that, thus far, not one half the elephant's mental capabilities have been developed, or even understood.
It would be of great interest to determine by experiment the full educational capacity of this interesting quadruped.
It would be equally interesting to determine the limit of its reasoning powers in applied mechanics.
An animal that can turn a hand-organ at the proper speed, or ring a telephone and go through the motions of listening with a receiver, can be taught to push a smoothing-plane invented purposely for him; but whether he would learn of himself to plane the rough surface smooth, and let the smooth ones remain untouched, is an open question.
While it is generally fruitless and unsatisfactory to enter the field of speculation, I can not resist the temptation to assert my belief that an elephant can be taught to read written characters, and also to express some of his own thoughts or states of feeling in writing.
It would be a perfectly simple matter to prepare suitable appliances by which the sagacious animal could hold a crayon in his trunk, and mark upon a surface adapted to his convenience.
Many an elephant has been taught to make chalk-marks on a blackboard.
In Julian's work on "The Nature of Animals," the eleventh chapter of the second book, he describes in detail the wonderful performances of elephants at Rome, all of which he saw.
One passage is of peculiar interest to us, and the following has been given as a translation: "...I saw them writing letters on Roman tablets with their trunks, neither looking awry nor turning aside.
The hand, however, of the teacher was placed so as to be a guide in the formation of the letters; and, while it was writing, the animal kept its eye fixed down in an accomplished and scholar- like manner."
I can conceive how an elephant may be taught that certain characters represent certain ideas, and that they are capable of intelligent combinations.
The system and judgment and patient effort which developed an active, educated, and even refined intellect in Laura Bridgman--deaf, dumb and blind from birth-- ought certainly to be able to teach a clear-headed, intelligent elephant to express at least _some_ of his thoughts in writing.
I believe it is as much an act of murder to wantonly take the life of a healthy elephant as to kill a native Australian or a Central- African savage.
If it is more culpable to kill an ignorant human savage than an elephant, it is also more culpable to kill an elephant than an echinoderm.
Many men are both morally and intellectually lower than many quadrupeds, and are, in my opinion, as wholly destitute of that indefinable attribute called soul as all the lower animals commonly are supposed to be.
If an investigator like Dr. Yerkes, and an educator like Dr. Howe, should take it in hand to develop the mind of the elephant to the highest possible extent, their results would be awaited with peculiar interest, and it would be strange if they did not necessitate a revision of the theories now common among those who concede an immortal soul to every member of the human race, even down to the lowest, but deny it to all the animals below man.
Curvature in the Brain of an Elephant.
There is curvature of the spine; and there is curvature in the brain.
It afflicts the human race, and all other vertebrates are subject to it.
In the Zoological Park we have had, and still have, a persistent case of it in a female Indian elephant now twenty-three years of age, named "Alice."
Her mental ailment several times manifested itself in Luna Park, her former home; but when we purchased the animal her former owners carelessly forgot to mention it.
Four days after Alice reached her new temporary home in our Antelope House, and while being marched around the Park for exercise, she heard the strident cry of one of our mountain lions, and immediately turned and bolted.
Young as she was at that time, her two strong and able-bodied keepers, Thuman and Bayreuther, were utterly unable to restrain her.
She surged straight forward for the front door of the Reptile House, and into that building she went, with the two keepers literally swinging from her ears.
As the great beast suddenly loomed up above the crowd of sightseers in the quiet building, the crowd screamed and became almost panic-stricken.
Partly by her own volition and partly by encouragement, she circumnavigated the turtle-bank and went out.
Once outside she went where she pleased, and the keepers were quite unable to control her.
Half an hour later she again headed for the Reptile House and we knew that she would again try to enter.
In view of the great array of plate glass cases in that building, many of them containing venomous cobras, rattlesnakes, moccasins and bushmasters, we were thoroughly frightened at the prospect of that crazy beast again coming within reach of them.
With our men fighting frantically, and exhausted by their prolonged efforts to control her, Alice again entered the Reptile House.
As she attempted to pass into the main hall,--the danger zone,--our men succeeded in chaining her front feet to the two steel posts of the guard rail, set solidly in concrete on each side of the doorway.
Alice tried to pull up those posts by their roots, but they held; and there in front of the Crocodile Pool the keepers and I camped for the night.
We fed her hay and bread, to keep her partially occupied, and wondered what she would do in the morning when we would attempt to remove her.
Soon after dawn a force of keepers arrived.
Chaining the elephant's front feet together so that she could not step more than a foot, we loosed the chains from the two posts and ordered her to come to an "about face," and go out.
Instead of doing that she determinedly advanced toward the right, and came within reach of twelve handsome glazed cases of live reptiles that stood on a long table.
Frantically the men tried to drive her back.
For answer she put her two front feet on the top bar of the steel guard rail and smashed ten feet of it to the floor.
Then she began to butt those glass snake cages off their table, one by one.
_"Boom!"
"Bang!"
"Crash!
"_ they went on the floor, one after another.
Soon fourteen banded rattlesnakes of junior size were wriggling over the floor.
"Smash" went more cases.
The Reptile House was in a great uproar.
Soon the big wall cases would be reached, and then--I would be obliged to shoot her dead, to avoid a general delivery of poisonous serpents, and big pythons from twenty to twenty-two feet long.
The room resounded with our shouts, and the angry trumpeting of Alice.
At last, by vigorous work with the elephant hooks, Alice was turned and headed out of the building.
A foot at a time she passed out, then headed toward the bear dens.
Midway, we steered her in among some young maple trees, and soon had her front legs chained to one of them.
Alice tried to push it over, and came near to doing so.
Then we quickly tied her hind legs together,--and she was all ours.
Seeing that all was clear for a fall, we joyously pushed Alice off her feet.
She went over, and fell prone upon her side.
In three minutes all her feet were securely anchored to trees, and we sat down upon her prostrate body.
At that crowning indignity Alice was the maddest elephant in the world for that day.
We gave her food, and the use of her trunk, and left her there twenty-four hours, to think it over.
She deserved a vast beating with canes; but we gave her no punishment whatever.
It would have served no good purpose.
During the interval we telephoned to Coney Island, and asked Dick Richards, the former keeper of Alice, to come and reason with her.
Promptly he came,--and he is still guiding as best he can the checkered destinies of that erring female.
When Alice was unwound and permitted to arise,--with certain limitations as to her progress through the world,--it was evident that she was in a chastened mood.
She quietly marched to her quarters at the Antelope House, and there we interned her.
But that was not all of Alice.
Very soon we had to move her to the completed Elephant House, half a mile away.
Keeper Richards said that two or three times she had bolted into buildings at Luna Park; so we prepared to overcome her idiosyncrasies by a combination of force and strategy.
I had the men procure a strong rope about one hundred feet long, in the middle of which I had them fix a very nice steel hook, large enough to hook suddenly around a post or a tree.
One end of that rope we tied to the left foot of Charming Alice, and the remainder of the rope was carried out at full length in front of her.
Willingly enough she started from the Antelope House, and Richards led her about three hundred feet.
Then she stopped, and disregarding all advice and hooks, started to come about, to return to the Antelope House.
Quickly the anchor was hooked around the nearest fence post, and Alice fetched up against a force stronger than herself.
She was greatly annoyed, but in a few minutes decided to go on.
Another lap of two hundred feet, and the same act was repeated, without the slightest variation.
This process continued for nearly half a mile.
By that time we were opposite the Elk House and Alice had become wild with baffled rage.
She tried hard to smash fences and uproot trees.
At last she stood still and refused to move another foot; and then we played our ace of trumps.
Near by, twenty laborers were working.
Calling all hands, they took hold of that outstretched rope, and heading straight for the new Elephant House started a new tug of war.
Every "heave-ho" of that hilarious company meant a three-foot step forward for Gentle Alice,--willy-nilly.
As she raged and roared, the men heaved and laughed.
A yard at a time they pulled that fatal left foot, into the corral and into the apartment of Alice; and she had to follow it.
Ever since that time, Alice has been permanently under arrest, and confined to her quarters; but within the safe precincts of two steel-bound yards she carries children on her back, and in summer earns her daily bread.
Elephant Mentality in the Jungle.
Mr. A. E. Ross, while Commissioner of Forests in Burma, had many interesting experiences with elephants, and he related the following: A bad-tempered mahout who had been cruel to his work-elephant finally so enraged the animal that it attempted to take revenge.
To forestall an accident, the mahout was discharged, and for two years he completely disappeared.
After that lapse of time he quietly reappeared, looking for an engagement.
As the line of elephants stood at attention at feeding time, with a score of persons in a group before them, the elephant instantly recognized the face of his old enemy, rushed for him, and drove him out of the camp.
An ill-tempered and dangerous elephant, feared by everybody, once had the end of his trunk nearly cut off in an accident.
While the animal was frantic with the pain of it, Mr. Ross ordered him to lie down.
As the patient lay in quiet submission, he dressed the wound and put the trunk in rude bamboo splints.
The elephant wisely aided the amateur elephant doctor until the wound healed; and afterward that once dangerous animal showed dog-like affection for Mr. Ross.
XII THE MENTAL AND MORAL TRAITS OF BEARS Considered as a group, the bears of the world are supremely interesting animals.
In fact, no group surpasses them save the Order Primates, and it requires the enrollment of all the apes, baboons and monkeys to accomplish it.
From sunrise to sunrise a bear is an animal of original thought and vigorous enterprise.
Put a normal bear in any new situation that you please, he will try to make himself master of it.
Use any new or strange material that you please, of wood, metal, stone or concrete, and he will cheerfully set out to find its weakest points and destroy it.
If one board in a wall happens to be of wood a little softer than its fellows, with wonderful quickness and precision he will locate it.
To tear his way out of an ordinary wooden cage he asks nothing better than a good crack or a soft knot as a starting point.
Let him who thinks that all animals are mere machines of heredity and nothing more, take upon himself the task of collecting, yarding, housing and KEEPING a collection of thirty bears from all over the world, representing from ten to fifteen species.
In a very short time the believer in bear knowledge by inheritance only, will begin to see evidences of new thought.
In spite of our best calculations, in twenty-two years and a total of about seventy bears, we have had three bear escapes.
The species involved were an Indian sloth bear, an American black bear and a Himalayan black bear.
The troublesome three laboriously invented processes by which, supported by surpassing acrobatics, they were able to circumvent our overhanging bars.
Now, did the mothers of those bears bequeath to them the special knowledge which enabled them to perform the acrobatic mid-air feat of warping themselves over that sharp-pointed overhang barrier?
No; because none of their parents ever saw steel cage-work of any kind.
Universal Traits.
The traits common to the majority of bear _species_ as we see them manifested in captivity are the following: First, playfulness; second, spasmodic treachery; third, contentment in comfortable captivity; fourth, love of water; fifth, enterprise in the mischievous destruction of things that can be destroyed.
The bears of the world are distributed throughout Asia, Borneo, the heavy forests of Europe, all North America, and the northwestern portion of South America.
In view of their wonderfully interesting traits, it is surprising that so few books have been written about them.
The variations in bear character and habit are almost as wide as the distribution of the species.
There are four books in English that are wholly devoted to American bears and their doings.
These are "The Grizzly Bear" and "The Black Bear," by William H. Wright, of Spokane(Scribner's), "The Grizzly Bear," by Enos A.
Mills, and "The Adventures of James Capen Adams."
In 1918 Dr. C. Hart Merriam published as No.
41 of "North American Fauna" a "Review of the Grizzly and Brown Bears of North America" (U.S.
Govt.).
This is a scientific paper of 135 pages, the product of many years of collecting and study, and it recognizes and describes eighty-six species and sub-species of those two groups in North America.
The classification is based chiefly upon the skulls of the animals.
It is unfortunate that up to date no bear student with a tireless pen has written The Book of Bears.
But let no man rashly assume that he knows "all about bears."
While many bears do think and act along certain lines, I am constantly warning my friends, "Beware of the Bear!
You never can tell what he will do next."
I hasten to state that of all the bears of the world, the "pet" bear is the most dangerous.
A Story of a "Pet" Bear.
In one of the cities of Canadaa gentleman greatly interested in animals kept a young bear cub, as a pet; and once more I say--if thine enemy offend thee, present him with a black-bear cub.
The bear was kept in a back yard, chained to a post, and after his first birthday that alleged "pet" dominated everything within his circumpolar region.
One day a lady and gentleman called to see the pet, to observe how tame and good-natured it was.
The owner took on his arm a basket of tempting apples, and going into the bear's territory proceeded to show how the Black One would eat from his owner's hand.
The bear was given an apple, which was promptly eaten.
The owner reached for a second, but instead of accepting it, the bear instantly became a raging demon.
He struck Mr. C. a lightning- quick and powerful blow upon his head, ripping his scalp open.
With horrible growls and bawling, the beast, standing fully erect, struck again and again at his victim, who threw his arms across his face to save it from being torn to pieces.
Fearful blows from the bear's claw-shod paws rained upon Mr. C.'s head, and his scalp was almost torn away.
In the melee he fell, and the bear pounced upon him, to kill him.
The visiting gentleman rushed for a club.
Meanwhile the lady visitor, rendered frantic by the sight of the bear killing her host, did a very brave but suicidally dangerous thing.
She _seized the hindquarters_ of the bear, gripping the fur in her bare hands, and actually dragged the animal off its victim!
Fortunately at that dangerous juncture the lady's husband rushed up with a club, beat the raging animal as it deserved, and mastered it.
The owner of the bear survived his injuries, and by a great effort the surgeons saved his scalp.
A "pet" bear in its second year may become the most dangerous of all wild animals.
This is because it _seems_ so affectionate and docile, and yet is liable to turn in one second,--and without the slightest warning, --into a deadly enemy.
Scores of times we have seen this quick change in temper take place in bears inhabiting our dens.
Four bears will be quietly and peacefully consuming their bread and vegetables when,-- "_biff!_" Like a stroke of lightning a hairy right arm shoots out and lands with a terriffic jolt on the head of a peaceful companion.
The victim roars,--in surprise, pain and protest, and then a fight is on.
The aggressor roars and bawls, and follows up his blow as if to exterminate his perfectly inoffensive cage-mate.
Mean and cruel visitors are fond of starting bear fights by throwing into the cages tempting bits of fruit, or peanuts; and sometimes a peach stone kills a valuable bear by getting jammed in the pyloric orifice of the stomach.
The owners of bears should NEVER allow visitors to throw food to them.
Unlimited feeding by visitors will spoil the tempers of the best bears in the world.
Power of Expression in Bears.
Next to the apes and monkeys, I regard bears as the most demonstrative of all wild animals.
The average bear is proficient in the art of expression.
The position of his ears, the pose of his head and neck, the mobility of his lips and his walking or his resting attitudes all tell their story.
To facial and bodily expression the bear adds his voice; and herein he surpasses most other wild animals!
According to his mood he whines, he threatens, or warns by loud snorting.
He roars with rage, and when in pain he cries, or he bawls and howls.
In addition to this he threatens an enemy by snapping his jaws together with a mighty ominous clank, accompanied by a warning nasal whine.
An angry bear will at times give a sudden rake with his claws to the ground, or the concrete on which he stands.
Now, with all this facility for emotional expression, backed by an alert and many-sided mind, boundless energy and a playful disposition, is it strange that bears are among the most interesting animals in the world?
Bears in Captivity.
With but few exceptions the bears of the world are animals with philosophic minds, and excellent reasoning power, though rarely equal to that of the elephant.
One striking proof of this is the promptness with which adult animals accept _comfortable_ captivity, and settle down in contentment.
What we mean by comfortable captivity very shortly will be defined.
No bear should be kept in a cage with stone walls and an uneven floor; nor without a place to climb; and wherein life is a daily chapter of inactive and lonesome discomfort and unhappiness.
The old-fashioned bear "pit" is an abomination of desolation, a sink- hole of misery, and all such means of bear torture should be banished from all civilized countries.
He who cannot make bears comfortable, contented and happy should not keep any.
A large collection of bears of many species properly installed may be relied upon to reveal many variations of temperament and mentality, from the sanguine and good-natured stoic to the hysterical demon.
Captivity brings out many traits of character that in a wild state are either latent or absent.
Prominent Traits of Prominent Species.
After twenty years of daily observation we now know that The grizzly is the most keen-minded species of all bears.
The big Alaskan brown bears are the least troublesome in captivity.
The polar bear lives behind a mask, and is not to be trusted.
The black bear is the nearest approach to a general average in ursine character.
The European brown bears are best for training and performances.
The Japanese black bear is nervous, cowardly and hysterical; the little Malay sun bear is the most savage and unsatisfactory.
The Lesson of the Polar and Grizzly.
The polar bears of the north, and the Rocky Mountain grizzlies, a hundred years ago were bold and aggressive.
That was in the days of the weak, small-bore, muzzle-loading rifles, black powder and slow firing.
Today all that is changed.
All those bears have recognized the fearful deadliness of the long-range, high-power repeating rifle, and the polar and the grizzly flee from man at the first sight of him, fast and far.
No grizzly attacks a man unless it has been attacked, or wounded, or cornered, or _thinks_ it is cornered.
As an exception, Mr. Stefansson observed two or three polar bears who seemed to be quite unacquainted with man, and but little afraid of him.
The great California grizzly is now believed to be totally extinct.
The campaign of Mr. J.
A. McGuire, Editor of _Outdoor Life_ Magazine, to secure laws for the reasonable protection of bears, is wise, timely and thoroughly deserving of success because such laws are now needed.
The bag limit on grizzlies this side of Alaska should be one per year, and no trapping of grizzlies should be permitted anywhere.
The big brown bears of Alaska have not yet recognized the true deadliness of man.
They have vanquished so many Indians, and injured or killed so many white men that as yet they are unafraid, insolent, aggressive and dangerous.
They need to be shot up so thoroughly that they will learn the lesson of the polars and grizzlies,--that man is a dangerous animal, and the only safe course is to run from him at first sight.
Bears Learn the Principles of Wild Life Protection.
Ordinarily both the grizzlies and black bears are shy, suspicious and intensely "wild" creatures; and therefore the quickness and thoroughness with which they learn that they are in sanctuary is all the more surprising.
The protected bears of the Yellowstone Park for years have been to tourists a source of wonder and delight.
The black bears are recklessly trustful, and familiar quite to the utmost limits.
The grizzlies are more reserved, but they have done what the blacks have very wisely not done.
They have broken the truce of protection, and attacked men on their own ground.
Strange to say, of several attacks made upon camping parties, the most serious and most nearly fatal was that of 1917 upon Ned Frost, the well-known guide of Cody, Wyoming, and his field companion.
They were sleeping under their wagon, well wrapped from the cold in heavy blankets and comfortables, and it is to their bedding alone that they owe their lives.
They were viciously attacked by a grizzly, dragged about and mauled, and Frost was seriously bitten and clawed.
Fortunately the bedding engaged the activities of their assailant sufficiently that the two men finally escaped alive.
How Buffalo Jones Disciplined a Bad Grizzly.
The most ridiculous and laughable performance ever put up with a wild grizzly bear as an actor was staged by Col. C.
J.
("Buffalo") Jones when he was superintendent of the wild animals of the Yellowstone Park.
He marked down for punishment a particularly troublesome grizzly that had often raided tourists' camps at a certain spot, to steal food.
Very skilfully he roped that grizzly around one of his hind legs, suspended him from the limb of a tree, and while the disgraced and outraged silver-tip swung to and fro, bawling, cursing, snapping, snorting and wildly clawing at the air, Buffalo Jones whaled it with a bean-pole until he was tired.
With commendable forethought Mr. Jones had for that occasion provided a moving-picture camera, and this film always produces roars of laughter.
Now, here is where we guessed wrongly.
We supposed that whenever and wherever a well-beaten grizzly was turned loose, the angry animal would attack the lynching party.
But not so.
When Mr. Jones' chastened grizzly was turned loose, it thought not of reprisals.
It wildly fled to the tall timber, plunged into it, and there turned over a new leaf.
I  once said: "C. J., you ought to shoot some of those grizzlies, and teach all the rest of them to behave themselves."
[Illustration with caption: WILD BEARS QUICKLY RECOGNIZE PROTECTION The truce of the black bears of the Yellowstone Park.
The grizzlies are not nearly so trustful.
Photographed by Edmund Heller, 1921.
(All rights reserved.)]
"I know it!"
he responded, "I know it!
But Col. Anderson won't let me: He says that if we did, some people would make a great fuss about it; and I suppose they would."
Recently, however, it has been found imperatively necessary to teach the Park grizzlies a few lessons on the sanctity of a sanctuary, and the rights of man.
We will now record a few cases that serve to illustrate the mental traits of bears.
Case I.
The Steel Panel.
Two huge male Alaskan brown bears, Ivan and Admiral, lived in adjoining yards.
The partition between them consisted of panels of steel.
The upper panels were of heavy bar iron.
The bottom panels, each four feet high and six feet long, were of flat steel bars woven into a basket pattern.
The ends of these flat bars had been passed through narrow slots in the heavy steel frame, and firmly clinched.
We would have said that no land animal smaller than an elephant could pull out one of those panels.
By some strange aberration in management, one day it chanced that Admiral's grizzly bear wife was introduced for a brief space into Ivan's den.
Immediately Admiral went into a rage, on the ground that his constitutional rights had been infringed.
At once he set to work to recover his stolen companion.
He began to test those partition panels, one by one.
Finally he found the one that seemed to him least powerful, and he at once set to work to tear it out of its frame.
The keepers knew that he could not succeed; but he thought differently.
Hooking his short but very powerful claws into the meshes he braced backward and pulled.
After a fierce struggle an upper corner yielded.
Then the other corner yielded; and at last the whole upper line gave way.
I reached the scene just as he finished tearing both ends free.
I saw him bend the steel panel inward, crush it down with his thousand pounds of weight, and dash through the yawning hole into his rival's arena.
Then ensued a great battle.
The two huge bears rose high on their hind legs, fiercely struck out with their front paws, and fought mouth to mouth, always aiming to grip the throat.
They bit each other's cheeks but no serious injuries were inflicted, and very soon by the vigorous use of pick-handles the two bear keepers drove the fighters apart.
Case 2.
Ivan's Begging Scheme.
Ivan came from Alaska when a small cub and he has long been the star boarder at the Bear Dens.
He is the most good-natured bear that we have, and he has many thoughts.
Having observed the high arm motion that a keeper makes in throwing loaves of bread over the top of the nine-foot cage work, Ivan adopted that motion as part of his sign language when food is in sight outside.
He stands up high, like a man, and with his left arm he motions, just as the keepers do.
Again and again he waves his mighty arm, coaxingly, suggestively, and it says as plain as print: "Come on!
Throw it in!
Throw it!"
If there is too much delay in the response, he motions with his right paw, also, both arms working together.
It is irresistible.
At least 500 times has he thus appealed, and he will do it whenever a loaf of bread is held up as the price of an exhibition of his sign language.
Of course Ivan thought this out himself, and put it into practice for a very definite purpose.
Case 3.
Ivan's Invention for Cracking Beef Bones.
Ivan invented a scheme for cracking large beef bones, to get at the ultimate morsels of marrow.
He stands erect on his hind feet, first holds the picked bone against his breast, then with his right paw he poises it very carefully upon the back of his left paw.
When it is well balanced he flings it about ten feet straight up into the air.
When it falls upon the concrete floor a sufficient number of times it breaks, and Ivan gets his well-earned reward.
This same plan was pursued by Billy, another Alaskan brown bear.
Case 4.
A Bear's Ingenious Use of a Door.
When Admiral is annoyed and chased disagreeably by either of his two cage-mates he runs into his sleeping-den, slams the steel door shut from the inside, and thus holds his tormentors completely at bay until it suits him to roll the door back again and come out.
At night in winter when he goes to bed he almost always shuts the door tightly from within, and keeps it closed all night.
He does not believe in sleeping- porches, nor wide-open windows in sleeping-quarters.
Case 5.
Admiral Will Not Tolerate White Boots.
Recently our bear keepers have found that Admiral has violent objections to boots of white rubber.
Keeper Schmidt purchased a pair, to take the place of his old black ones, but when he first wore them into the den for washing the floor the bear flew at him so quickly and so savagely that he had all he could do to make a safe exit.
A second trial having resulted similarly, he gave the boots a coat of black paint.
But one coat was not wholly satisfactory to Admiral.
He saw the hated white through the one coat of black, promptly registered "disapproval," and the patient keeper was forced to add another coat of black.
After that the new boots were approved.
Case 6.
The Mystery of Death.
Once upon a time we had a Japanese black bear named Jappie, quartered in a den with a Himalayan black bear,--the species with long, black side-whiskers and a white tip to its chin.
The Japanese bear was about one-third smaller than the Himalayan black.
One night the Japanese bear died, and in the morning the keepers found it lying on the level concrete top of the sleeping dens.
At once they went in to remove the body; but the Himalayan black bear angrily refused to permit them to touch it.
For half an hour the men made one effort after another to coax, or entice or to drive the guardian bear away from the dead body, but in vain.
When I reached the strange and uncanny scene, the guardian bear was in a great rage.
It took a position across the limp body, and from that it fiercely refused to move or to be driven.
As an experiment we threw in a lot of leaves, and the guardian promptly raked them over the dead one and stood pat.
We procured a long pole, and from a safe place on the top of the nearest overhang, a keeper tried to prod or push away the guardian of the dead.
The living one snarled, roared, and with savage vigor bit the end of the pole.
By the time the bear was finally enticed with food down to the front of the den, and the body removed, seven hours had elapsed.
Now, what were the ideas and emotions of the bear?
One man can answer about as well as another.
We think that the living bear realized that something terrible had happened to its cage-mate,-- in whom he never before had manifested any guardianship interest,--and he felt called upon to defend a friend who was very much down and out.
It was the first time that he had encountered the great mystery, Death; and whatever it was, he resented it.
Case 7.
A Terrible Punishment.
Once we had a particularly mean and vicious young Adirondack black bear named Tommy.
In a short time he became known as Tommy the Terror.
We put him into a big yard with Big Ben, from Florida, and two other bears smaller than Ben, but larger than himself.
In a short time the Terror had whipped and thoroughly cowed Bruno and Jappie.
Next he tackled Ben; but Ben's great bulk was too much for him.
Finally he devoted a lot of time to bullying and reviling _through the bars_ a big but good-natured cinnamon bear, named Bob, who lived in the next den.
In all his life up to that time, Bob had had only one fight.
Tommy's treatment of Bob was so irritating to everybody that it was much remarked upon; and presently we learned how Bob felt about it.
One morning while doing the cage work, the keeper walked through the partition gate from Bob's den into Tommy's.
He slammed the iron gate behind him, as usual, but this time the latch did not catch as usual.
In a moment Bob became aware of this unstable condition.
Very innocently he sauntered up to the gate, pushed it open, and walked through into the next den.
The keeper was then twenty feet away, but a warning cry from without set him in motion to stop the intruder.
[Illustration with caption: ALASKAN BROWN BEAR "IVAN" BEGGING FOR FOOD He invented the very expressive sign language that he employs.]
[Illustration with caption: THE MYSTERY OF DEATH.
Himalayan bear jealously guarding the body of a dead cage-mate.]
Having no club to face, Bob quietly ignored the keeper's broom.
Paying not the slightest attention to the three inoffensive bears, Bob fixed his gaze on the Terror, at the far end of the den, then made straight for him.
Tommy made a feeble attempt at defense, but Bob seized him by the back, bit him, and savagely shook him as a terrier shakes a rat.
The Terror yelled lustily "Murder!
Murder!
Help!"
but none of the other bears made a move for his defense.
Bob was there to give Tommy the punishment that was due him for his general meanness and his insulting behavior.
The horrified keeper secured his pike-pole, with a stout spike set in the end for defense, and drove the spike into Bob's shoulder.
Bob went right on killing the Terror.
Again the keeper drove in his goad, and blood flowed freely; but Bob paid not the slightest attention to this severe punishment.
Then the keeper began to beat the cinnamon over the nose; and that made him yield.
He gave the Terror a parting shake, let him go, and with a bloody shoulder deliberately walked out of that den and into his own.
The punishment of the Terror went to the full limit, and we think all those bears approved it.
In a few hours he died of his injuries.
Case 8.
The Grizzly Bear and the String.
One of the best illustrations I know of the keenness and originality of a wild bear's mind and senses, is found in Mr. W. H. Wright's account of the grizzly bear he did not catch with an elk bait and two set guns, in the Bitter Root Mountains.
This story is related in Chapter VI.
Case 9.
Silver King's Memory of His Capture.
At this moment we have a huge polar bear who refuses to forget that he was captured in the water, in Kane Basin, and who now avoids the water in his swimming pool, almost as much as any burned child dreads fire.
Throughout the hottest months of midsummer old Silver King lies on the rock floor of his huge and handsome den, grouching and grumbling, and not more than once a week enjoying a swim in his spacious pool.
No other polar bear of ours ever manifested such an aversion for water.
The other polar bears who have occupied that same den loved that pool beyond compare, and used to play in its waters for hours at a time.
Evidently the chase of Silver King through green arctic water and over ice floes, mile after mile, his final lassoing, and the drag behind a motor boat to the ship were, to old Silver King, a terrible tragedy.
Now he regards all deep water as a trap to catch bears, but, strange to relate, the winter's snow and ice seem to renew his interest in his swimming pool.
Occasionally he is seen at play in the icy water, and toying with pieces of ice.
Memory in Bears.
I think that ordinarily bear memory for human faces and voices is not long.
Once I saw Mr. William Lyman Underwood test the memory of a black bear that for eighteen months had been his household pet and daily companion.
After a separation of a year, which the bear spent in a public park near Boston, Mr. Underwood approached, alone, close up to the bars of his cage.
He spoke to him in the old way, and called him by his old name, but the bear gave absolutely no sign of recognition or remembrance.
How a Wild Grizzly Bear Caches Food.
The silver-tip grizzly bear of the Rocky Mountains has a mental trait and a corresponding habit which seems to be unique in bear character.
It is the habit of burying food for future use.
Once I had a rare opportunity to observe this habit.
It was in the Canadian Rockies of British Columbia, in the month of September(1905), while bears were very activism.
John M. Phillips and I shot two large white goats, one of which rolled down a steep declivity and out upon the slide- rock, where it was skinned.
The flensed body of the other was rolled over the edge of a cliff, and fell on a brushy soil-covered spot about on the same level as the remains of goat No.
1.
The fresh goat remains were promptly discovered by a lusty young grizzly, which ate to satiety from Goat No.
1.
With the remains of.
Goat No.
2 the grizzly industriously proceeded to establish a cache of meat for future use.
The goat carcass was dragged to a well chosen spot of seclusion on moss-covered earth.
On the steep hillside a shallow hole was dug, the whole carcass rolled into it, and then upon it the bear piled nearly a wagon load of fresh earth, moss, and green plants that had been torn up by the roots.
Over the highest point of the carcass the mass was twenty-four inches deep.
On the ground the cache was elliptical in shape, and its outline measured about seven by nine feet.
On the lower side it was four feet high, and on the upper side two feet.
The cache was built around two larch saplings, as if to secure their support.
On the uphill side of the cache the ground was torn up in a space shaped like a half moon, twenty-eight feet long by nineteen wide.
I regard that cache as a very impressive exhibit of ursine thought, reasoning and conclusion.
It showed more fore-thought and provision, and higher purpose in the conservation of food than some human beings ever display, even at their best.
The plains Indians and the buffalo hunters were horribly wasteful and improvident.
_The impulse of that grizzly was to make good use of every pound of that meat, and to conserve for the future._ Survival of the Bears.--The bears of North America have survived thirty thousand years after the lions and the sabre-toothed tigers of La Brea perished utterly and disappeared.
But there were bears also in those days, as the asphalt pits reveal.
Now, why did not all the bears of North America share the fate of the lions and the tigers?
It seems reasonable to answer that it was because the bears were wiser, more gifted in the art of self-preservation, and more resourceful in execution.
In view of the omnivorous menu of bears, and their appalling dependence upon small things for food, it is to me marvelous that they now maintain themselves with such astounding success.
A grizzly will dig a big and rocky hole three or four feet deep to get one tiny ground-squirrel, a tidbit so small that an adult grizzly could surely eat one hundred of them, like so many plums, at one sitting.
A bear will feed on berries under such handicaps that one would not be surprised to see a bear starve to death in a berry-patch.
But almost invariably the wild bear when killed is fairly well fed and prosperous; and I fancy that no one ever found a bear that had died of cold and exposure.
The cunning of the black bear in self- preservation surpasses that of all other large mammal species of North America save the wolf, the white-tailed deer and the coyote.
In the game of self-preservation I will back that quartet against all the other large land animals of North America.
What Constitutes Comfortable Captivity.
It is impossible for any man of good intelligence to work continuously with a wild animal without learning something of its thoughts and its temper.
In our Zoological Park, day by day and hour by hour our people carry into practical effect their knowledge of the psychology of our mammals, birds and reptiles.
In view of the work that we have done during the past twenty-one years of the Park's history, we do not need to apologize for claiming to know certain definite things about wild animal minds.
It is my belief that nowhere in the world is there in one place so large an aggregation of dangerous beasts, birds and reptiles as ours.
And yet accidents to our keepers from them have been exceedingly few, and all have been slight save four.
Twenty-five years ago I endeavored to plan for the Zoological Society the most humane and satisfactory bear dens on earth.
Fortunately we knew something about bears, both wild and captive.
Never before have we written out the exact motif of those dens, but it is easily told.
We endeavored to give each bear the following things: A very large and luxurious den, open to the sky, and practically on a level with the world; Perfect sanitation; A great level playground of smooth concrete; High, sloping rocks to climb upon when tired of the level floor; A swimming pool, always full and always clean; Openwork steel partitions between cages, to promote sociability and cheerfulness; Plenty of sunlight, but an adequate amount of shade; Dry and dark sleeping dens with wooden floors, and _Close-up views of all bears for all visitors._ If there are anywhere in the wilds any bears as healthy, happy and as secure in their life tenure as ours, I do not know of them.
The wild bear lives in hourly fear of being shot, and of going to bed hungry.
The service of our bear dens is based upon our knowledge of bear psychology.
We knew in the beginning that about 97 per cent of our bears would come to us as cubs, or at least when quite young, and we decided to take full advantage of that fact.
All our bears save half a dozen all told, have been trained to permit the keepers of the dens to go into their cages, and to _make no fuss about it._ The bears know that when the keepers enter to do the morning housework, or at any other time for any other purpose, they must at once climb up to the gallery, above the sleeping dens, and stay there until the keepers retire.
A bear who is slow about going up is sternly ordered to "Go on!"
and if he shows any inclination to disobey, a heavy hickory pick-handle is thrown at him with no uncertain hand.
Now, in grooming a herd of bears, a hickory pick-handle leaves no room for argument.
If it hits, it hurts.
If it does not hit a bear, it strikes the concrete floor or the rocks with a resound and a rebound that frightens the boldest bear almost as much as being hit.
So the bear herd wisely climbs up to the first balcony and sits down to wait.
No bear ever leaps down to attack a keeper.
The distance and the jolt are not pleasant; and whenever a bear grows weary and essays to climb down, he is sternly ordered back.
The keepers are forbidden to permit any familiarities on the part of their bears.
All the bears, save one, that have come to us fully grown, and savage, have been managed by other methods, involving shifting cages.
On two occasions only have any of our keepers been badly bitten in our bear dens.
Both attacks were due to over-trustfulness of "petted" bears, and to direct disobedience of fixed orders.
From the very beginning I laid down this law for our keepers, and have repeated it from year to year.
"_Make no pets of animals large enough to become dangerous._ Make every animal understand and admit day by day that you are absolute master, that it has got to obey, and that if it disobeys, or attacks you, _you will kill it!_" Familiarity with a dangerous wild animal usually breeds contempt and attack.
Timidity is so fatal that none but courageous and determined men should be chosen, _or be permitted,_ to take care of dangerous animals.
In every zoological garden heroic deeds are common; and the men take them all as coming in the day's work.
Men in positions of control over zoological parks and gardens should recognize it as a solemn duty to provide good salaries for all men who take care of live wild mammals, birds and reptiles.
_A man who is in daily danger of getting hurt should not every waking hour of his life be harried and worried by poverty in his home._ Let me cite one case of real heroism in our bear dens, which went in with "the day's work," as many others have done.
Keeper Fred Schlosser thought it would be safe to take our official photographer, Mr. E. R. Sanborn, into the den of a European brown bear mother, to get a close-up photograph of her and her cubs.
Schlosser felt sure that Brownie was "all right," and that he could prevent any accident.
But near the end of the work the mother bear drove her cubs into their sleeping den and then made a sudden, vicious and most unexpected attack upon Keeper Schlosser.
She rushed him, knocked him down, seized him by his thigh, bit him severely, and then actually began _to drag him_ to the door of her sleeping den!
(Just _why_ she did this I cannot explain!)
Heroically ignoring the great risk to himself, and thinking of nothing but saving Schlosser, Mr. Sanborn seized the club that had fallen from the keeper's hand when he fell, rushed up to the enraged bear and beat her over the head so savagely and so skilfully that she was glad to let go of her victim and retreat into her den.
Then Mr. Sanborn seized Schlosser, dragged him away from the den, and stood guard over him until help came.
XIII MENTAL TRAITS OF A FEW RUMINANTS When we wish to cover with a single word the hoofed and horned "big game" of the world, we say Ruminants.
That easy and comprehensive name embraces (1) the Bison and Wild Cattle, (2) the Sheep, Goats, Ibexes and Markhors, (3) the Deer Family and (4) the Antelope Family.
These groups must be considered separately, because the variations in mind and temperament are quite well marked; but beyond wisdom in self-preservation, I do not regard the intelligence of wild ruminants as being really great.
Intellectually the ruminants are not as high as the apes and monkeys, bears, wolves, foxes and dogs, the domestic horses and the elephants.
They are handicapped by feet that are good for locomotion and defense, but otherwise are almost as helpless as so many jointed sticks.
This condition closes to the ruminants the possibility of a long program of activities which the ruminant brain might otherwise develop.
The ruminant hoof and leg is well designed for swift and rough travel, for battles with distance, snow, ice, mud and flood, and for a certain amount of fighting, but they are inept for the higher manifestations of brain power.
Because of this unfortunate condition, the study of ruminants in captivity does not yield a great crop of results.
The free wild animals are far better subjects, and it is from them that we have derived our best knowledge of ruminant thoughts and ways.
It is not possible, however, to set forth here any more than a limited number of representative species.
THE BISON AND WILD CATTLE.
The American Bison.--Through the age- long habit of the American bison to live in large herds, and to feel, generation after generation, the sense of personal security that great numbers usually impart, the bison early acquired the reputation of being a stolid or even a stupid animal.
Particularly was this the case in the days of the greatest bison destruction, when a still-hunter could get "a stand" on a bunch of buffaloes quietly grazing at the edge of the great mass, and slowly and surely shoot down each animal that attempted to lead that group away from the sound of his rifle.
During that fatal period the state of the buffalo mind was nothing less than a tragedy.
"The bunch" would hear a report two hundred yards away, they would see a grazing cow suddenly and mysteriously fall, struggle, kick the air, and presently lie still.
The individuals nearest dully wondered what it was all about.
Those farthest away looked once only, and went on grazing.
If an experienced old cow grew suspicious and wary, and quietly set out to walk away from those mysterious noises, "bang!"
said the Mystery once more, and she would be the one to fall.
On this murderous plan, a lucky and experienced hunter could kill from twenty to sixty head of buffaloes, mostly cows, on a space of three or four acres.
The fatal trouble was that each buffalo felt that the presence of a hundred or a thousand others feeding close by was an insurance of _security_ to the individual, and so there was no stampede.
But after all, the bison is not so big a fool as he looks.
He can think; and he can _learn._ In 1886, when we were about to set out for Montana to try to find a few wild buffaloes for the National Museum, before the reckless cowboys could find, kill and waste absolutely the last one, a hilarious friend said: "Pshaw!
You don't need to take any rifles!
Just get a rusty old revolver, mount a good, sensible horse, ride right up alongside the lumbering old beasts, and shoot them down at arm's length."
We went; but not armed with "a rusty old revolver."
We found a few buffaloes, but ye gods!
How changed they were from the old days!
Although only two short years had elapsed since the terminal slaughter of the hundreds of thousands whose white skeletons then thickly dotted the Missouri-Yellowstone divide, _they had learned fear of man,_ and also how to preserve themselves from that dangerous wild beast.
They sought the remotest bad lands, they hid in low grounds, they watched sharply during every daylight hour, and whenever a man on horseback was sighted they were off like a bunch of racers, for a long and frantic run straight away from the trouble-maker.
Even at a distance of two miles, or as far as they could see a man, they would run from him,--not one mile, or two, but five miles, or seven or eight miles, to another wild and rugged hiding-place.
To kill the buffalo specimens that we needed, three cowboys and the writer worked hard for nearly three months, and it was all that we could do to outwit those man-scared bison, and to get near enough to them to kill what we required.
Many a time, when weary from a long chase, I thought with bitter scorn of my friend with the rusty-old-revolver in his mind.
No deer, mountain sheep, tiger, bears nor elephants,--all of which I have pursued (and sometimes overtaken!)
--were ever more wary or keen in self- preservation than those bison who _at last_ had broken out from under the fatal spell of herd security.
I am really glad that this strange turn of Fortune's wheel gave me the knowledge of the true scope of the buffalo mind before the last chance had passed.
What did a wild buffalo do when he found himself with a broken leg, and unable to travel, but otherwise sound?
Did he go limping about over the landscape, to attract enemies from afar, and be quickly shot by a man or torn to pieces by wolves?
Not he!
With the keen intelligence of the wounded wild ruminant, he chose the line of least resistance, and on three legs fled downhill.
He went on down, and kept going, until he reached the bottom of the biggest and most tortuous coulee in his neighborhood.
And then what?
Instead of coming to rest in a reposeful little valley a hundred feet wide, he chose the most rugged branch he could find, the one with the steepest and highest banks, and up that dry bed, with many a twist and turn, he painfully limped his way.
At last he found himself in a snug and safe ditch, precisely like a front line trench seven feet wide, with perpendicular walls and zig- zagging so persistently that the de'il himself could not find him save by following him up to close quarters, and landing upon his horns.
There, without food or water, the wounded animal would stand for many days,--in fact, until hunger would force him back to the valley's crop of grass.
His wild remedy was to _keep still,_ and give that broken leg its chance to knit and grow strong.
I have seen in buffalo skeletons healed bone fractures that filled us with wonder.
One case that we shot was a big and heavy bull whose hip socket had been utterly smashed, femur head and all, by a heavy rifle ball; but the bull had escaped in spite of his wound, and he had nursed it until it had healed in _good working order._ We can testify that he could run as well as any of the bisons in his bunch.
Of course young bisons can be tamed, and to a certain extent educated.
"Buffalo" Jones broke a pair of two-year-old bulls to work under a yoke, and pull a light wagon.
He tried them with bridles and bits, but the buffaloes refused to work with them.
With tight-fitting halters, and the exercise of much-muscle, he was able for a time to make them "gee" and "haw."
But not for long.
When they outgrew his ability in free-hand drawing, he rigged an upright windlass on each side of his wagon-box, and firmly attached a line to each.
When the team was desired to "gee," he deftly wound up the right line on its windlass, and vice versa for "haw."
But even this did not last a great while.
The motor control was more tentative than absolute.
Once while driving beside a creek on a hot and thirsty day, the super-heated buffaloes suddenly espied the water, twenty feet or so below the road.
Without having been bidden they turned toward it, and the windlass failed to stop them.
Over the cut bank they went, wagon, man and buffalo bulls, "in one red burial blent."
Although they secured their drink, their reputation as draught oxen was shattered beyond repair, and they were cashiered the service.
Elsewhere I have spoken of the bison's temper and temperament.
THE WILD SHEEP.--It takes most newly-captured adult mountain sheep about six months in palatial zoo quarters to get the idea out of their heads that every man who comes near them, even including the man who feeds and waters them, is going to kill them, and that they must rush wildly to and fro before it occurs.
But there are exceptions.
At the same time, wild herds soon learn the large difference between slaughter and protection, and thereafter accept man's hay and salt with dignity and persistence.
The fine big-horn photographs that have been taken of _wild_ sheep herds on public highways just outside of Banff, Alberta, tell their own story more eloquently than words can do.
The photograph of wild sheep, after only twenty-seven years of protection, feeding in herds in the main street of Ouray, Colorado, is an object lesson never to be forgotten by any student of wild animal psychology.
And can any such student look upon such a picture and say that those animals have not thought to some purpose upon the important question of danger and safety to sheep?
Is there anyone left who still believes the ancient and bizarre legend that mountain sheep rams jump off cliffs and alight upon their horns?
I think not.
People now know enough about anatomy, and the mental traits of wild sheep, to know that nothing of that kind ever occurred save by a dreadful accident, followed by the death of the sheep.
No spinal column was ever made by Nature or developed by man that could endure without breaking a headforemost fall from the top of a cliff to the slide-rock bottom thereof.
In Colorado, in May 1907, the late Judge D. C. Beaman of Denver saw a big-horn ram which was pursued by dogs to the precipitous end of a mountain ridge, take a leap for life into space from top to bottom.
The distance straight down was "between twenty and twenty-five feet."
The ram went down absolutely upright, with his head fully erect, and his feet well apart.
He landed on the slide rock on his feet, broke no bones, promptly recovered himself and dashed away to safety.
Judge Beaman declared that "the dogs were afraid to approach even as near as the edge of the cliff at the point from which the sheep leaped off."
John Muir held the opinion that the legend of horn-landing sheep was born of the wild descent of frightened sheep down rocks so steep that they _seemed_ perpendicular but were not, and the sheep, after touching here and there in the wild pitch sometimes landed in a heap at the bottom,--quite against their will.
To me this has always seemed a reasonable explanation.
The big-horn sheep has one mental trait that its host of ardent admirers little suspect.
It does not like pinnacle rocks, nor narrow ledges across perpendicular cliffs, nor dangerous climbing.
It does not "leap from crag to crag," either up, down or across.
Go where you will in sheep hunting, nine times out of ten you will find your game on perfectly safe ground, from which there is very little danger of falling.
In spirit and purpose the big-horns are great pioneers and explorers.
They always want to see what is on the other side of the range.
They will sight a range of far distant desert mountains, and to see what is there will travel by night across ten or twenty miles of level desert to find out.
It was in the Pinacate Mountains of northwestern Mexico, on the eastern shore of the head of the Gulf of California, that we made our most interesting observations on wild big-horn sheep.
On those black and blasted peaks and plains of lava, where nature was working hard to replant with desert vegetation a vast volcanic area, we found herds of short-haired, undersized big-horn sheep, struggling to hold their own against terrific heat, short food and long thirst.
It is a burning shame that since our discovery of those sheep hunters of a dozen different kinds have almost exterminated them.
We saw one band of seventeen sheep, close to Pinacate Peak, all so utterly ignorant of the ways of men that they practically refused to be frightened at our presence and our silent guns.
We watched them a long time, forgetful of the flight of time.
They were not shrewdly suspicious of danger.
They fed, and frolicked, and dozed, as much engrossed in their indolence as if the world contained no dangers for them.
One day Mr. John M. Phillips and I shot two rams, for the Carnegie Museum; and the next morning I had the most remarkable lesson that I ever learned in mountain sheep psychology.
Early on that November morning Mr. Jeff Milton and I left our chilly lair in a lava ravine, and most foolishly left both our rifles at our camp.
Hobbling along on foot we led a pack mule over half a mile of rough and terrible lava to a dead sheep.
There we quickly skinned the animal, packed the skin and a horned head upon the upper deck of our mule, and started back to camp, leading our assistant.
Half way back we looked westward across an eighth of a mile of rough, black lava, and saw standing on a low point a fine big-horn ram.
He stood in a statuesque attitude, facing us, and fixedly gazing at us.
He was trying to make out what we were, and to determine why a perfectly good pair of sheep horns should grow out of the back of a sorrel mule!
Ethically he had a right to be puzzled.
Mr. Milton and I were greatly annoyed by the absence of our rifles; and he proposed that we should leave the mule where he stood, go back to our camp, get our guns, and kill the sheep.
Now, even then I was quite well up on the subject of curiosity in wild animals, and I knew to a minute what to count upon as the standing period of sheep, goat or deer.
As gently as possible I informed Milton that _no_ sheep would ever stand and look at a sorrel mule for the length of time it would take us to foot it over that lava to camp, and return.
But my companion was optimistic, and even skeptical.
"Maybe he will, now!"
he persisted.
"Let's try it.
I think he may wait for us."
Much against my judgment, and feeling secretly rebellious at the folly of it all, I agreed to his plan,--solely to be "a good sport," and to play his game.
But _I_ knew that the effort would be futile, as well as exhausting.
Jeff tied the mule, for the sheep to contemplate.
We went and got those rifles.
We were gone fully twenty minutes.
When we again reached the habitat of the mule, _that ram was still there!_ Apparently he had not moved a muscle, nor stirred a foot, nor even batted an eye.
Talk about curiosity in a wild animal!
He was a living statue of it.
He continued to hold his pose on his lava point while we stalked him under cover of a hillock of lava, and shot him,--almost half an hour after we first saw him.
He had been overwhelmingly puzzled by the uncanny sight of a pair of curling horns like his own, growing out of the back of a long-eared sorrel mule which he felt had no zoological right to wear them.
He did his level best to think it out; he became a museum specimen in consequence, and he has gone down in history as the Curiosity Ram.
Mental Attitude of Captured Big-Horn Sheep.
In 1906 an enterprising and irrepressible young man named Will Frakes took the idea into his head that he must catch some mountain sheep alive, and do it alone and single-handed.
Presently he located a few _Ovis nelsoni_ in the Avawatz Mountains near Death Valley, California.
Finding a water hole to which mountain sheep occasionally came at night to drink, he set steel traps around it.
One by one he caught five sheep of various ages, but chiefly adults.
The story of this interesting performance is told in _Outdoor Life_ magazine for March, April and May, 1907.
I am interested in the mental processes of those sheep as they came in close contact with man, and were compelled by force of circumstances to accept captivity.
Knowing, as all animal men do, the fierce resistance usually made by adult animals to the transition from freedom to captivity, I was prepared to read that those nervous and fearsome adult sheep fought day by day until they died.
But not so.
Those sheep showed clear perceptive faculties and good judgment.
They were quick to learn that they were conquered, and with amazing resignation they accepted the new life and its strange conditions.
In describing the chase on foot in thick darkness of a big old male mountain sheep with a steel trap fast on his foot, Mr. Frakes says: "A sheep's token of surrender is to lie down and lie still.
Once he 'possums, no matter what you do, or how badly you may hurt him, he will never flinch.
And when this sheep ("Old Stonewall") was thrown down by the trap, he evidently thought that he was captured, and lay still for a few minutes before he found out the difference, which gave me time to come up with him....
So I went to camp, got a trap clamp and some sacks, made a kind of sled and dragged him in.
It was just midnight when I got him tied down, and just sun-up when I got to camp with him.
I fixed him up the best I could, stood him up beside the other big-horn and took their pictures.
He looked so "rough and ready" that I named him "Old Stonewall."
But for all his proud, defiant bearing he has always been a good sheep, _and never tried to fight me._ Still he can hit quick and hard when he wants to, and I have to keep him tied up all the time to keep him from killing the other bucks."
Now, I know not what conclusion others will draw from the above clear and straightforward recital, but to me it established in _Ovis nelsoni_ a reputation for quick thinking, original reasoning and sound conclusions.
In an incredibly short period those animals came up to the status of tame animals.
The five sheep caught by Mr. Frakes were suddenly confronted by new conditions, such as their ancestors had never even dreamed of meeting; and _all of them reacted in the same way._ That was more than "animal behavior."
It was Thought, and Reason!
THE GOATS.
White Mountain Goat.--I never have had any opportunity to study at length, in the wilds, the mental traits of the markhors, ibexes, gorals or serows.
I have however, enjoyed rare opportunities with the white Rocky Mountain goat, on the summits of the Canadian Rockies as well as in captivity.
Where we were, on the Elk River Mountains of East Kootenay, the goats had little fear of man.
They did not know that we were in the group of the world's most savage predatory animals, and we puzzled them.
Fourteen of them once leisurely looked down upon us from the edge of a cliff, and silently studied us for a quarter of an hour.
An hour later three of them ran through our camp.
One morning an old billy calmly lay down to rest himself on the mountain side about 300 feet above our tents.
At last, however, he became uneasy, and moved away.
This goat is not a timid and fearsome soul, ready to go into a panic in the presence of danger.
The old billy believes that the best defense is a vigorous offense.
On the spot where Cranbrook, B. C., now stands, an old billy was caught unawares on an open plain and surrounded by Indians, dogs and horses.
In the battle that ensued he so nearly whipped the entire outfit that a squaw rushed wildly to the rescue with a loaded rifle, to enable the Red army to win against the one lone goat.
In those mountains the white goat, grizzly bear, mountain sheep, mule deer and elk all live together, in perfect liaison, and never but once have I heard of the goat getting into a fight with a joint-tenant species.
A large silver-tip grizzly rashly attacked a full-grown billy, and managed to inflict upon him mortal injuries.
Before he fell, however, the goat countered by driving his little skewer-sharp black horns into the vitals of the grizzly with such judgment and precision that the dead grizzly was found by Mr. A.
B. Fenwick quite near the dead goat.
We know that the mountain goat is a good reasoner in certain life- or-death matters affecting himself.
He knows no such thing as becoming panic-stricken from surprise or fear.
An animal that looks death in the face every hour from sunrise until sunset is not to be upset by trifles.
We have seen that if a dog and several men corner a goat on a precipice ledge, and hem him in so that there is no avenue of escape, he does not grow frantic, as any deer or most sheep would do, and plunge off into space to certain death.
Not he.
He stands quite still, glares indignantly upon his enemies, shakes his head, occasionally grits his teeth or stamps a foot, but otherwise waits.
His attitude and his actions say: "Well, it is your move.
What are you going to do next?"
Most captive ruminants struggle frantically when put into crates for shipment.
White goats very rarely do so.
They recognize the inevitable, and accept it with resignation.
Captive antelopes and deer often kill themselves by dashing madly against wire fences, but I never knew a white goat to injure itself on a fence.
Many a wild animal has died from fighting its shipping crate; but no wild goat ever did so.
A white goat will walk up a forty-five degree plank to the roof of his house, climb all over it, and joyously perch on the peak; but no mountain sheep or deer of ours ever did so.
_They are afraid!_ Only the Himalayan tahr equals the white goat in climbing in captivity, and it will climb into the lower branches of an oak tree, just for fun.
Of all the ruminant animals I know intimately, the white mountain goat is the philosopher-in-chief.
Were it not so, how would it be possible for him to live and thrive, and attain happiness, on the savage and fearsome summits that form his chosen home?
We must bear in mind that the big-horn does not dare to risk the haunts and trails of his white rivals.
Hear the Cragmaster of the Rockies: [Illustration with caption: THE STEADY-NERVED AND COURAGEOUS MOUNTAIN GOAT He refused to be stampeded off his ledge by men or dog.
Photographed at eight feet by John M. Phillips (1905).]
"On dizzy ledge of mountain wall, above the timber-line I hear the riven slide-rock fall toward the stunted pine.
Upon the paths I tread secure no foot dares follow me, For I am master of the crags, and march above the scree."
In other chapters I have referred to the temperament and logic of this animal, the bravest mountaineer of all America.
THE DEER.--In nervous energy the species of the Deer Family vary all the way from the nervous and hysterical barasingha to the sensible and steady American elk that can successfully be driven in harness like a horse.
As I look over the deer of all nations I am bound to award the palm for sound common-sense and reasoning power to the elk.
A foolishly nervous deer seldom takes time to display high intelligence.
Naturally we dislike men, women, children or wild animals who are always ready to make fools of themselves, stampede, and disfigure the landscape.
The Axis Deer is quietly sensible,--so long as there is no catching to be done.
Try to catch one, and the whole herd goes off like a bomb.
Many other species are similar.
No wild deer could act more absurdly than does the axis, the barasingha and fallow, even after generations have been bred in captivity.
The Malay Sambar Deer of the Zoological Park have one droll trait.
The adult bucks bully and browbeat the does, in a rather mild way, so long as their own antlers are on their heads.
But when those antlers take their annual drop, "O, times!
O, manners!
What a change!"
The does do not lose a day in flying at them, and taking revenge for past tyranny.
They strike the hornless bucks with their front feet, they butt them, and they bite out of them mouthfuls of hair.
The bucks do not seem, to know that they can fight without their antlers, and so the tables are completely turned.
This continues until the new horns grow out, the velvet dries and is rubbed off,--and then quickly the tables are turned again.
No other deer species of my personal acquaintance has ever equalled the American elk of Wyoming in recognizing man's protection and accepting his help in evil times.
It is not only a few wise ones, or a few half-domestic bands, but vast wild herds of thousands that every winter rush to secure man's hay in the Jackson Hole country, south of the Yellowstone Park.
No matter how shy they _all_ are in the October hunting season, in the bad days of January and February they know that the annual armistice is on, and it means hay for them instead of bullets.
They swarm in the level Jackson Valley, around S. N. Leek's famous ranch and others, until you can see a square mile of solid gray-yellow living elk bodies.
Mr. Leek once caught about 2,500 head in one photograph, all hungry.
They crowd around the hay sleds like hungry horses.
In their greatest hunger they attack the ranchmen's haystacks, just as far as the stout and high log fences will permit them to go, and many a kind-hearted ranchman has robbed his own haystacks to save the lives of starving and despairing elk.
The Yellowstone Park elk know the annual shooting and feeding seasons just as thoroughly as do the men of Jackson Hole.
Once there was a bold and hardy western man who trained a bunch of elk to dive from a forty-foot high platform into a pool of water.
I say that he "trained" them, because it really was that.
The animals quickly learned that the plunge did nothing more than to shock and wet them, and so they submitted to the part they had to play, with commendable resignation.
Some deer would have fought the program every step of the way, and soon worn themselves out; but elk, and also horses, learn that the diving performance is all in the day's work; which to me seems like good logic.
A few persons believe that such performances are cruel to the animals concerned, but the diving alone is not necessarily so.
Some deer have far too much curiosity, too much desire to know "What is that?"
and "What is it all about?"
The startled mule deer leaps out, jumps a hundred feet or more at a great pace, then foolishly stops and looks back, to gratify his curiosity.
That is the hunter's chance; and that fatal desire for accurate information has been an important contributory cause to the extermination of the mule deer, or Rocky Mountain "black-tail," throughout large areas.
In the Yellowstone Park the once-wild herds of mule deer have grown so tame under thirty years of protection that they completely overrun the parade ground, the officers' quarters, and even enter porches and kitchens for food.
Several authors have remarked upon the habits of the elephant, llama and guanaco in returning to the same spot; and this reminds me of a coincidence in my experience that few persons will believe when I relate it.
In the wild and weird bad-lands of Hell Creek, Montana, I once went out deer hunting in company with the original old hermit wolf-hunter of that region, named Max Sieber.
With deep feeling Max told me of a remarkable miss that he had made the previous year in firing at a fine mule deer buck from the top of a small butte; for which I gave him my sympathy.
In the course of our morning's tramp through the very bad-lands that were once the ancestral home of the giant carnivorous dinosaur, yclept _Tyrannosaurus rex,_ we won our way to the foot of a long naked butte.
Then Sieber said, very kindly: "If you will climb with me up to the top of this butte I will show you where I missed that big buck."
It was not an alluring proposition, and I thought things that I did not speak.
However, being an Easy Mark, I said cheerfully, "All right, Max.
Go ahead and show me."
We toiled up to a much-too-distant point on the rounded summit, and as Max slowed up and peered down the farther side, he pointed and began to speak.
"He was standing right down there on that little patch of bare-- why!"
he exclaimed.
"_There's a dee-er there now!_ But it's a doe!
Get down!
Get down!"
and he crouched.
Then I woke up and became interested.
"It is _not_ a doe, Max.
I see horns!"--Bang!
And in another five seconds a fine buck lay dead on the very spot where Sieber's loved and lost buck had stood one year previously.
But that was only an unbelievable coincidence,--unbelievable to all save old Max.
The natural impulse of the mule deer of those bad-lands when flushed by a hunter is to _run over a ridge,_ and escape over the top; but that is bad judgement and often proves fatal.
It would be wiser for them to run _down,_ to the bottoms of those gashed and tortuous gullies, and escape by zig-zagging along the dry stream beds.
The White-Tailed, or Virginia Deer is the wisest member of the Deer Family in North America, and it will be our last big-game species to become extinct.
It has reduced self-preservation to an exact science.
In areas of absolute protection it becomes very bold, and breeds rapidly.
Around our bungalow in the wilds of Putman County, New York, the deer come and stamp under our windows, tramp through our garden, feed in broad daylight with our neighbor's cattle, and jauntily jump across the roads almost anywhere.
They are beautiful objects, in those wild wooded landscapes of lake and hill.
But in the Adirondacks, what a change!
If you are keen you may see a few deer in the closed season, but to see in the hunting season a buck with good horns you must be a real hunter.
As a skulker and hider, and a detector of hunters, I know no deer equal to the white-tail.
In making a safe get-away when found, I will back a buck of this species against all other deer on earth.
He has no fatal curiosity.
He will not halt and pose for a bullet in order to have a look at you.
What the startled buck wants is more space and more green bushes between the Man and himself.
The Moose is a weird-looking and uncanny monster, but he knows one line of strategy that is startling in its logic.
Often when a bull moose is fleeing from a long stern chase,--always through wooded country,--he will turn aside, swing a wide semicircle backward, and then lie down for a rest close up to leeward of his trail.
There he lies motionless and waits for man-made noises, or man scent; and when he senses either sign of his pursuer, he silently moves away in a new direction.
The Antelopes of the Old World.
The antelopes, gazelles, gnus and hartebeests of Africa and Asia almost without exception live in herds, some of them very large.
Owing to this fact their minds are as little developed, individually, as the minds of herd animals generally are.
The herd animal, relying as it does upon its leaders, and the security that large numbers always seem to afford, is a creature of few independent ideas.
It is not like the deer, elk, sheep or goat that has learned things in the hard school of solitude, danger and adversity, with no one on whom to rely for safety save itself.
The basic intelligence of the average herd animal can be summed up in one line: "Post your sentinels, then follow your leader."
Judging from what hunters in Africa have told me, the hunting of most kinds of African antelopes is rather easy and quiet long- range rifle work.
In comparison with any sheep, goat, ibex, markhor and even deer hunting, it must be rather mild sport.
A level grassy plain with more or less bushes and small trees for use in stalking is a tame scenario beside mountains and heavy forests, and it seems to me that this sameness and tameness of habitat naturally fails to stimulate the mental development of the wild habitants.
In captivity, excepting the keen kongoni, or Coke hartebeest, and a few others, the old-world antelopes are mentally rather dull animals.
They seem to have few thoughts, and seldom use what they have; but when attacked or wounded the roan antelope is hard to finish.
In captivity their chief exercise consists in rubbing and wearing down their horns on the iron bars of their indoor cages, but I must give one of our brindled gnus extra credit for the enterprise and thoroughness that he displayed in wrecking a powerfully-built water-trough, composed of concrete and porcelain.
The job was as well done as if it had been the work of a big-horn ram showing off.
But that was the only exhibition of its kind by an African antelope.
The Alleged "Charge" of the Rhinoceros.
For half a century African hunters wrote of the assaults of African rhinoceroses on caravans and hunting parties; and those accounts actually established for that animal a reputation for pugnacity.
Of late years, however, the evil intentions of the rhinoceros have been questioned by several hunters.
Finally Col. Theodore Roosevelt firmly declared his belief that the usual supposed "charge" of the rhinoceros is nothing more nor less than a movement to draw nearer to the strange man-object, on account of naturally poor vision, to see what men look like.
In fact, I think that most American sportsmen who have hunted in Africa now share that view, and credit the rhino with very rarely running at a hunter or a party in order to do damage.
The Okapi, of Central Africa, inhabits dense jungles of arboreal vegetation and they are so expert in detecting the presence of man and in escaping from him that thus far, so far as we are aware, no white man has ever shot one!
The native hunters take them only in pitfalls or in nooses.
Mr. Herbert Lang, of the American Museum of Natural History, diligently hunted the okapi, with native aid, but in spite of all his skill in woodcraft the cunning of the okapi was so great, and the brushy woods were so great a handicap to him, that he never shot even one specimen.
In skill in self-preservation the African bongo antelope seems to be a strong rival of the okapi, but it has been killed by a few white men, of whom Captain Kermit Roosevelt is one.
XIV MENTAL TRAITS OF A FEW RODENTS Out of the vast mass of the great order of the gnawing animals of the world it is possible here to consider only half a dozen types.
However, these will serve to blaze a trail into the midst of the grand army.
The White-Footed Mouse, or Deer Mouse.
On the wind-swept divides and coulees of the short-grass region of what once were the Buffalo Plains of Montana, only the boldest and most resourceful wild mice can survive.
There in 1886 we found a white-footed mouse species (_Peromyscus leucopus_), nesting in the brain cavities of bleaching buffalo skulls, on divides as bare and smooth as golf links.
In 1902, while hunting mule deer with Laton A. Huffman in the wildest and most picturesque bad-lands of central Montana, we pitched our tent near the upper waterhole of Hell Creek.
[Footnote: A few months later, acting upon the information of our fossil discoveries that we conveyed to Professor Henry Fairfield Osborn, an expedition from the American Museum of Natural History ushered into the scientific world the now famous Hell Creek fossil bed, and found, about five hundred feet from the ashes of our camp-fire, the remains of _Tyrannosaurus rex._]For the benefit of our camp-fire, our cook proceeded to hitch his rope around a dry cottonwood log and snake it close up to our tent.
When it was cut up, we found snugly housed in the hollow, a nest, made chiefly of feathers, containing five white-footed mice.
Packed close against the nest was a pint and a half of fine, clean seed, like radish seed, from some weed of the Pulse Family.
While the food-store was being examined, and finally deposited in a pile upon the bare ground near the tent door, the five mice escaped into the sage-brush.
Near by stood an old-fashioned buggy, which now becomes a valuable piece of stage property.
The next morning, when Mr. Huffman lifted the cushion of his buggy-seat, and opened the top of the shallow box underneath, the five mice, with their heads close together in a droll-looking group, looked out at him in surprise and curiosity, and at first without attempting to run away.
But very soon it became our turn to be surprised.
We found that these industrious little creatures had gathered up every particle of their nest, and every seed of their winter store, and carried all of it up into the seat of that buggy!
The nest had been carefully re-made, and the seed placed close by, as before.
Considering the number of journeys that must have been necessary to carry all those materials over the ground, plus a climb up to the buggy seat, the industry and agility of the mice were amazing.
By way of experiment, we again removed the nest, and while the mice once more took to the sage-brush, we collected all the seed, and poured it in a pile upon the ground, as before.
During the following night, those indomitable little creatures _again_ carried nest and seed back into the buggy seat, just as before!
Then we gathered up the entire family of mice with their nest and seed, and transported them to New York.
Now, the reasoning of those wonderful little creatures, in the face of new conditions, was perfectly obvious, (1) Finding themselves suddenly deprived of their winter home and store of food, (2) they scattered and fled for personal safety into the tall grass and sage-brush.
(3) At night they assembled for a council at the ruins of their domicile and granary.
(4) They decided that they must in all haste find a new home, close by, because (5) at all hazards their store of food must be saved, to avert starvation.
(6) They explored the region around the tent and camp-fire, and (7) finally, as a last resort, they ventured to climb up the thills of the buggy.
(8) After a full exploration of it they found that the box under the seat afforded the best winter shelter they had found.
(9) At once they decided that it would do, and without a moment's delay or hesitation the whole party of five set to work carrying those seeds up the thills--a fearsome venture for a mouse--and (10) there before daybreak they deposited the entire lot of seeds.
(11) Finding that a little time remained, they carried up the whole of their nest materials, made up the nest anew, and settled down within it for better or for worse.
Now, this is no effort of our imagination.
It is a story of actual facts, all of which can be proven by three competent witnesses.
How many human beings similarly dispossessed and robbed of home and stores, act with the same cool judgment, celerity and precision that those five tiny creatures then and there displayed?
The Wood Rat, Pack Rat, or Trading Rat.
Although I have met this wonderful creature (_Neotoma_) in various places on its native soil, I will quote from another and perfectly reliable observer a sample narrative of its startling mental traits.
At Oak Lodge, east coast of Florida, we lived for a time in the home of a pair of pack rats whose eccentric work was described to me by Mrs. C. F. Latham, as follows: First they carried a lot of watermelon seeds from the ground floor upstairs, and hid them under a pillow on a bed.
Then they took from the kitchen a tablespoonful of cucumber seeds and hid them in the pocket of a vest that hung upstairs on a nail.
In one night they removed from box number one, eighty five pieces of bee-hive furniture, and hid them in another box.
On the following night they deposited in box number one about two quarts of corn and oats.
Western frontiersmen and others who live in the land of the pack rat relate stories innumerable of the absurd but industrious doings of these eccentric creatures.
The ways of the pack rat are so erratic that I find it impossible to figure out by any rules known to me the workings of their minds.
Strange to say, they are not fiends and devils of malice and destruction like the brown rat of civilization, and on the whole it seems that the destruction of valuable property is not by any means a part of their plan.
They have a passion for moving things.
Their vagaries seem to be due chiefly to caprice, and an overwhelming desire to keep exceedingly busy.
I think that the animal psychologists have lost much by so completely ignoring these brain-busy animals, and I hope that in the future they will receive the attention they deserve.
Why experiment with stupid and nerveless white rats when pack rats are so cheap?
It was in the wonderland that on the map is labeled "Arizona" that I met some astonishing evidences of the defensive reasoning power of the pack rat.
In the Sonoran Desert, where for arid reasons the clumps of creosote bushes and salt bushes stand from four to six feet apart, the bare level ground between clumps affords smooth and easy hunting-grounds for coyotes, foxes and badgers, saying nothing of the hawks and owls.
Now, a burrow in sandy ground is often a poor fortress; and the dropping spine-clad joints of the tree choyas long ago suggested better defenses.
In many places we saw the entrance of pack rat burrows defended by two bushels of spiny choya joints and sticks arranged in a compact mound-like mass.
In view of the virtue in those deadly spines, any predatory mammal or bird would hesitate long before tackling a bushel of solid joints to dig through it to the mouth of a burrow.
Did those little animals collect and place those joints because of their defensive stickers,--with deliberate forethought and intention?
Let us see.
In the grounds of the Desert Botanical Laboratory, in November 1907, we found the answer to this question, so plainly spread before us that even the dullest man can not ignore it, nor the most skeptical dispute it.
We found some pack rat runways and burrow entrances so elaborately laid out and so well defended by choya joints that we may well call the ensemble a fortress.
On the spot I made a very good map of it, which is presented on page 164.
[Footnote: From "Camp-Fires on Desert and Lava" (Scribner's) page 304.]
The animal that made it was the White-Throated Pack Rat (_Neotoma albigula_).
The fortress consisted of several burrow entrances, the roads leading to which were defended by carefully constructed barriers of cactus joints full of spines.
The habitants had chosen to locate their fortress between a large creosote bush and a tree-choya cactus (_Opuntia fulgida_) that grew on bare ground, twelve feet apart.
When away from home and in danger, the pack rats evidently fled for safety to one or the other of those outposts.
Between them the four entrance holes, then in use, went down into the earth; and there were also four abandoned holes.
Connecting the two outposts,--the creosote bush and the choya,-- with the holes that were in daily use there were some much-used runways, as shown on the map; and each side of each runway was barricaded throughout its length with spiny joints of the choya.
A few of the joints were old and dry, but the majority were fresh and in full vigor.
We estimated that about three hundred cactus joints were in use guarding those runways; and no coyote or fox of my acquaintance, nor eke a dog of any sense, would rashly jump upon that spiny pavement to capture a rat.
[Illustration with caption: FORTRESS OF A PACK-RAT, AT TUCSON DEFENDED BY THE SPINY POINTS OF THE TREE CHOYA (_Opuntia fulgida_)] Beyond the cactus outpost the main run led straight to the sheltering base of a thick mesquite bush and a palo verde that grew tightly together.
This gave an additional ten feet of safe ground, or about twenty-five feet in all.
On our journey to the Pinacate Mountains, northwestern Mexico, we saw about twelve cactus-defended burrows of the pack rat, some of them carefully located in the midst of large stones that rendered digging by predatory animals almost impossible.
The beautiful little Desert Kangaroo Rat (_Dipodomys deserti_) has worked out quite a different system of home protection.
It inhabits deserts of loose sand and creosote bushes, where it digs burrows innumerable, always located amid the roots of the bushes, and each one provided with three or four entrances,--or exits, as the occasion may require.
Each burrow is a bewildering labyrinth of galleries and tunnels, and in attempting to lay bare an interior the loose sand caved in, and the little sprite that lived there either escaped at a distant point or was lost in the shuffle of sand.
The Gray Squirrel (_Sciurus carolinensis_).--This beautiful and sprightly animal quickly recognizes man's protection and friendship, and meets him half way.
Go into the woods, sit still, make a noise like a nut, and if any grays are there very soon you will see them.
The friendships between our Park visitors and the Park's wild squirrels are one of the interesting features of our daily life.
We have an excellent picture of Mrs. Russell Sage sitting on a park bench with a wild gray squirrel in her lap.
I have never seen red or fox squirrels that even approached the confidence of the gray squirrel in the truce with Man, the Destroyer, but no doubt generous treatment would produce in the former the gray squirrel's degree of confidence.
I never knew an observer of the home life of the gray squirrel who was not profoundly impressed by the habit of that animal in burying nuts in the autumn, and digging them up for food in the winter and spring.
From my office window I have seen our silver- gray friends come hopping through eight or ten inches of snow, carefully select a spot, then quickly bore a hole down through the snow to Mother Earth, and emerge with a nut.
Thousands of people have seen this remarkable performance and I think that the majority of them still ask the question: "_How_ does the squirrel know precisely where to dig?"
That question cannot be answered until we have learned how to read the squirrel mind.
Small city parks easily become overstocked with gray squirrels that are not adequately fed, and the result is,--complaints of "depredations."
Of course hungry and half-starved squirrels will depredate,--on birds' nests, fruit and gardens.
My answer to all inquirers for advice in such cases is--_feed the squirrels, adequately, and constantly, on cracked corn and nuts, and send away the surplus squirrels._ At this time many persons know that the wild animals and birds now living upon the earth are here solely because they have had sufficient sense to devise ways and means by which to survive.
The ignorant, the incompetent, the slothful and the unlucky ones have passed from earth and joined the grand army of fossils.
Take the case of the Rocky Mountain Pika, or little chief "hare," of British Columbia and elsewhere.
It is not a hare at all, and it is so queer that it occupies a family all alone.
I am now concerning myself with _Ochotona princeps,_ of the Canadian Rockies.
It is very small and weak, but by its wits it lives in a country reeking with hungry bears, wolverines and martens.
The pika is so small and so weak that in the open he could not possibly dig down below the grizzly bear's ability to dig.
And what does he do to save himself, and insure the survival of the fittest?
He burrows far down in the slide-rock that falls from the cliffs, where he is protected by a great bed of broken stone so thick that no predatory animal can dig through it and catch him.
There in those awful solitudes, enlivened only by the crack and rattle of falling slide-rock, the harsh cry of Clark's nut-cracker and the whistling wind sweeping over the storm-threshed summits and through the stunted cedar, the pika chooses to  make his home.
Over the slide-rock that protects him, the snows of the long and dreary winter pile up from six to ten feet deep, and lie unbroken for months.
And how does the pika survive?
[Illustration with caption: WILD CHIPMUNKS RESPOND TO MAN'S PROTECTION.
J. Alden Loring and his wild pets] [Illustration with caption: AN OPOSSUM FEIGNING DEATH] When he is awake, _he lives on hay, of his own making!_ In September and October, and up to the arrival of the enveloping snow, he cuts plants of certain kinds to his liking, he places them in little piles atop of rocks or fallen logs where the sun will strike them, and he leaves them there until they dry sufficiently to be stored without mildewing.
Mr. Charles L. Smith declared that the pikas know enough to change their little hay piles as the day wears on, from shade to sunlight.
The plants to be made into hay are cut at the edge of the slide-rock, usually about a foot in length, and are carried in and placed on flat- topped rocks around the mouth of the burrow.
The stems are laid together with fair evenness, and from start to finish the haymaking of the pika is conducted with admirable system and precision.
When we saw and examined half a dozen of those curing hay piles, we felt inclined to take off our hats to the thinking mind of that small animal which was making a perfectly successful struggle to hold its own against the winter rigors of the summits, and at the same time escape from its enemies.
The common, every-day Cotton-Tail Rabbit (_Lepus sylvaticus_) is not credited by anyone with being as wise as a fox, but that is due to our own careless habits of thought.
It has been man's way, ever since the days of the Cavemen, to underrate all wild animals except himself.
We are not going to cite a long line of individual instances to exhibit the mental processes or the natural wisdom of the rabbit.
All we need do is to point to its success in maintaining its existence in spite of the enemies arrayed against it.
Take the state of Pennsylvania, and consider this list of the rabbit's mortal enemies: 450,000 well-armed men and boys, regularly licensed and diligently gunning throughout six weeks of the year, and actually killing each year about 3,500,000 rabbits!
200,000 farmers hunting on their own farms, without licenses.
Predatory animals, such as dogs, cats, skunks, foxes and weasels.
Predatory birds: hawks, eagles and owls.
Destructive elements: forest fires, rain, snow and sleet.
Now, is it not a wonder that _any_ rabbits remain alive in Pennsylvania?
But they are there.
They refuse to be exterminated.
Half of them annually outwit all their enemies--smart as they are; they avoid death by hunger and cold, and they go on breeding in defiance of wild men, beasts and birds.
Is it not wonderful-- the mentality of the gray rabbit?
Again we say--the wild animal must think or die.
In recognizing man's protection and friendship, the rabbit is as quick on the draw as the gray squirrel.
In our Zoological Park where we constantly kill hunting cats in order that our little wild neighbors, the rabbits, squirrels and chipmunks may live, the rabbits live literally in our midst.
They hang around the Administration Building, rear and front, as if they owned it; and one evening at sunset I came near stepping out upon a pair that were roosting on the official door-mat on the porch.
There are times when they seem annoyed by the passage of automobiles over the service road.
To keep hungry rabbits from barking your young apple trees in midwinter, spend a dollar or two in buying two or three bushels of corn expressly for them.
The sentry system of the Prairie-"Dog" in guarding "towns" is very nearly perfect.
A warning chatter quickly sends every "dog" scurrying to the mouth of its hole, ready for the dive to safety far below.
No!
the prairie-"dog," rattlesnake and burrowing owl emphatically do NOT dwell together in peace and harmony in the burrow of the "dog."
The rodent hates both these interloping enemies, and carefully avoids them.
The pocket gopher does his migrating and prospecting at night, when his enemies are asleep.
The gray squirrel builds for itself a summer nest of leaves.
At the real beginning of winter the prairie-"dog" tightly plugs up with moist earth the mouth of his burrow; and he packs it with his nose.
The round-tailed muskrat of Florida (_Neofiber alleni_) builds a little platform over the water of the marsh in which it lives, on which it builds its nest high and dry.
The Hudsonian red squirrel will bark and scold at a human intruder for half an hour.
In Chapter IV I have already accorded the beaver a place with the most intelligent animals of the world.
The books that have been written concerning that species have been amply justified.
It is, however, impossible to refuse this important animal a place in any chapter devoted to the mental traits of rodents, and I deem it fitting to record here our latest experience with this remarkable species.
Our Last Beaver Experiment.
In the autumn of 1921 we emptied and cleaned out our Beaver Pond.
The old house originally built by the beavers in the centre of the pond, was for sanitary reasons entirely removed.
Work on the pond was not finished until about October 25; and the beavers had no house.
It seemed to me a physical impossibility for the beavers to begin a new house at that late date and unassisted finish it by the beginning of winter.
One beaver had escaped, and for the remaining three such a task would be beyond their powers.
I decided to give them a helping hand, provided they would accept it, by providing them with a wooden house, which they might if they chose, entirely surround and snugly cover with mud and sticks.
But would they accept it in a grateful spirit, and utilize it?
One cannot always tell what a wild animal will do.
With loose earth a low island with a flat top was built to carry the house.
Its top was six inches above high-water mark, and (that would, if accepted) be the floor of the permanent house.
A good, practicable tunnel was built to an underwater entrance.
Upon that our men set a square, bottomless house of wood, with walls two feet high, and a low roof sloping four ways.
Over all this the men piled in a neat mound a lot of tree branches of kinds suitable for beaver food; and with that we left the situation up to the beavers.
The finish of our work was made on October 28.
For a week there were no developments.
The beavers made no sign of approval or disapproval.
And then things began to happen.
On November 5 we saw a beaver carrying a small green branch into the house for _bedding!_ That meant that our offering was going to be accepted.
The subsequent chronology of that beaver house is as follows: Nov. 10.
The beavers pulled all our brush away from the house, back to a distance of six or seven feet.
The house stood fully exposed.
Nov. 11.
They began to pile up mud and sticks against the base of the south wall.
Nov. 15.
Mud-building to cover the house was in full progress.
Nov. 17.
Much of our brush had been placed in the stock of food wood being stored for winter use in the pond west of the house.
Nov. 29.
The outside of the house was completely covered up to the edges of the roof.
The beavers were working fast and hard.
No freezing weather yet.
Dec. 15.
The roof was not yet covered.
Ice had formed on the pond, and house-building operations were at an end until the spring of 1922.
XV THE MENTAL TRAITS OF BIRDS In comparison with mammalian mentality, the avian mind is much more elementary and primitive.
It is as far behind the average of the mammals as the minds of fishes are inferior to those of reptiles.
Instinct Prominent in Birds.
The average bird is more a creature of instinct than of reason.
Primarily it lives and moves by and through the knowledge that it has inherited, rather than by the observations it has made and the things it has thought out in its own head.
But let it not for one moment be supposed that the instinctive knowledge of the bird is of a mental quality inferior to that of the mammal.
The difference is in kind only, not in degree.
As a factor in self-preservation the keen and correct reasoning of the farm-land fox is in no sense superior to the wonderful instinct and prescience of the golden plover that, on a certain calendar day, or week, bids farewell to its comfortable breeding-grounds in the cold north beyond the arctic circle, rises high in the air and launches forth on its long and perilous migration flight of 8,000 miles to its winter resort in Argentina.
The Migrations of Birds.
Volumes have been written on the migrations of birds.
The subject is vast, and inexhaustable.
It is perhaps the most wonderful of all the manifestations of avian intelligence.
It is of interest chiefly to the birds of the temperate zone, whose summer homes and food supplies are for four months of the year buried under a mantle of snow and ice.
All but a corporal's guard of the birds of the United States and Canada must go south every winter or perish from starvation and cold.
It is a case of migrate or die.
Many of the birds do not mind the cold of the northern winter--if it is dry; and _if they could be fed in winter,_ many of them would remain with us throughout the year.
Consider the migratory habits of our own home favorites, and see what they reveal.
After all else has been said, bird migration is the one unfathomable wonder of the avian world.
Really, we know of it but little more than we know of the songs of the morning stars.
We have learned when the birds start; we know that many of them fly far above the earth; we know where some of them land, and the bird calendars show approximately when they will return.
And is not that really about _all_ that we do know?
[Illustration with caption: MIGRATION OF THE GOLDEN PLOVER From "Bird Migration,", by Dr. W. W. Cooke, U. S. Department of Agriculture, 1915.]
What courage it must take, to start on the long, tiresome and dangerous journey!
How do they know where to go, far into the heart of the South, to find rest, food and security?
When and where do they stop on the way to feed?
Vast areas are passed over without alighting; for many species never are seen in mid career.
Why is it that the golden plover feels that it is worth while to fly from the arctic coast to Argentina?
Let any man--if one there be--who is not profoundly impressed by the combined instinct and the reasoning of migratory birds do himself the favor to procure and study the 47-page pamphlet by Dr. Wells W. Cooke, of the U. S. Department of Agriculture, entitled "Bird Migration."
I wish I could reproduce it entire; but since that is impossible, here are a few facts and figures from it.
The Bobolink summers in the northern United States and southern Canada, and winters in Paraguay, making 5000 miles of travel each way.
The Scarlet Tanager summers in the northeastern quarter of the United States and winters in Colombia, Equador and northern Peru, a limit to limit flight of 3,880 miles.
The Golden Plover (_Charadrius dominicus_).--"In fall it flies over the ocean from Nova Scotia to South America, 2,400 miles--the longest known flight of any bird.
In spring it returns by way of the Mississippi Valley.
Thus the migration routes form an enormous ellipse, with a minor axis of 2,000 miles and a major axis stretching 8,000 miles from arctic America to Argentina."
(Cooke.)
The Arctic Tern (_Sterna paradisaea_), is "the champion long-distance migrant of the world.
It breeds as far north as it can find land on which to build its nest, and winters as far south as there is open water to furnish it food.
The extreme summer and winter homes are 11,000 miles apart, or a yearly round trip of 22,000 miles."
(Cooke.)
By what do migrating birds guide their courses high in air on a pitch-dark night,--their busy time for flying?
Do they, too, know about the mariner's Southern Cross, and steer by it on starlit nights?
Equally strange things have happened.
The regular semi-annual migrations of birds may fairly be regarded as the high-water mark of instinct so profound and far-reaching that it deserves to rank as high as reason.
To me it is one of the most marvelous things in Nature's Book of Wonders.
I never see a humming-bird poised over a floral tube of a trumpet creeper without pausing, in wonder that is perpetual, and asking the eternal question: "Frail and delicate feathered sprite, that any storm-gust might dash to earth and destroy, and that any enemy might crush, _how_ do you make your long and perilous journeys unstarved and unkilled?
Is it because you bear a charmed life?
What is the unsolved mystery of your tiny existence in this rough and cruel world?"
We understand well enough the foundation principles of mammalian and avian life, and existence under adverse circumstances.
The mammal is tied to his environment.
He cannot go far from the circumpolar regions of his home.
A bear chained to a stake is emblematic of the universal handicap on mammalian life.
Survive or perish, the average land-going quadruped must stay put, and make the best of the home in which he is born.
If he attempts to migrate fast and far, he is reasonably certain to get into grave danger, and lose his life.
The bird, however, is a free moral agent.
If the purple grackle does not like the sunflower seeds in my garden, lo!
he is up and away across the Sound to Oyster Bay, Long Island, where his luck may be better.
Failing there, he gives himself a transfer to Wilmington, or Richmond, via his own Atlantic coast line.
The wonderful migratory instincts of birds have been developed and intensified through countless generations by the imperative need for instinctive guidance, and the comparatively small temptation to inductive reasoning based on known facts.
Evidently the bird is emboldened to migrate by the comfortable belief that somewhere the world contains food and warmth to its liking, and that if it flies fast enough and far enough it will find it.
As a weather prophet, the prescience of the bird is strictly limited.
The warm spells of late February deceive the birds just as they do the flowers of the peach tree and the apple.
Often the bluebirds and robins migrate northward too early, encounter blizzards, and perish in large numbers from snow, sleet, cold and hunger.
The Homing Sense of Birds.
We can go no farther than to say that while the homing instinct of certain species of birds is quite well known, the mental process by which it functions is practically unknown.
The direction instinct of the homing pigeon is marvelous, but we know that that instinct does not leap full- fledged from the nest.
The homer needs assistance and training.
When it is about three months old, it is taken in a basket to a point a mile distant from its home and liberated.
If it makes good in returning to the home loft, the distances are increased by easy stages--two, three, five, ten, twenty, thirty, fifty and seventy- five miles usually being flown before the bird is sent as far as 100 miles.
The official long-distance record for a homing pigeon is 1689.44 miles, held by an American bird.
The homing instinct, or sense, is present in some mammals, but it is by no means so phenomenal as in some species of birds.
In mammals it is individual rather than species-wide.
Individual horses, dogs and cats have done wonderful things under the propulsion of the homing instinct, but that instinct is by no means general throughout those species.
Among wild animals, exhibitions of the home-finding instinct are rare, but the annals of the Zoological Park contain one amusing record.
For emergency reasons, a dozen fallow deer once were quartered in our Bison range, behind a fence only sixty-six inches high.
Presently they leaped out to freedom, disappeared in the thick northern forests of the Bronx, and we charged them up to profit and loss.
But those deer soon found that life outside our domain was not the dream of paradise that they had supposed.
After about a week of wandering through a cold, unsympathetic and oatless world those were sadder and wiser deer, and one night they all returned and joyously and thankfully jumped back into their range, where they were happy ever after.
Recognition of Sanctuary Protection.
In this field of precise observation and reasoning, most birds,--if not indeed all of them,--are quick in discernment and accurate in deduction.
The great gauntlet of guns has taught the birds of the United States and Canada to recognize the difference between areas of shooting and no shooting.
Dull indeed is the bird mind that does not know enough to return to the feeding-ground in which it has been safe from attack.
The wild geese and ducks are very keen about sanctuary waters, and no protected pond or river is too small to command attention.
Our own little Lake Agassiz, in the New York Zoological Park, each year is the resort of hundreds of mallards and black ducks.
And each year a number of absolutely wild wood ducks breed there and in spite of all dangers rear their young.
Our wild-fowl pond, surrounded by various installations for birds, several times has been honored by visiting delegations of wild geese, seven of which were caught in 1902 for exhibition.
The most astounding example of avian recognition of protection and human friendship is the spectacle of Mr. Jack Miner's wild goose sanctuary at Kingsville, Ontario, not far from Detroit.
With his tile works on one side and his home on the other, he scooped out between them clay for his factory and made a small pond.
With deliberate and praiseworthy intention Mr.
Miner planted there a little flock of pinioned wild Canada geese, as a notice of sanctuary and an invitation to wild flocks to come down for food, rest and good society.
Very slowly at first the wild geese began to come; but finally the word was passed along the line from Hudson Bay to Currituck Sound that Miner's roadhouse was a good place at which to stop.
Year by year the wild geese came, and saw, and were conquered.
So many thousands came that presently Mr.
Miner grew tired of spending out of his own pocket more than $700 a year for goose corn; and then the Canadian government most commendably assumed the burden, and made Mr.
Miner's farm a national bird preserve.
[Footnote: Mr.
Miner is writing his wild-goose story into a book: and the story is worth it!]
The annals of wild life protection literature contain many records and illustrations of the remarkable quickness and thoroughness of sanctuary recognition by birds.
On the other hand I feel greatly annoyed by the failure of waterfowl to reason equally well regarding the decoys of duck-shooters.
They fail to learn, either by experience or hearsay, that small flocks of ducks sitting motionless near a shore are loaded, and liable to go off.
They fail to learn that it is most wise to settle well outside such flocks of alleged ducks, and that it is a fatal mistake to plump down on the top of a motionless bunch.
Protective Association of Wasps and Caciques.
The colonizing caciques, of South America, representing four genera, are very solicitous of the safety of their colonies.
In numerous cases, these colonies are found in association with wasps, one or more nests invariably being found near the nests of the birds.
It is natural to infer that this strange association is due to the initiative of the birds.
When monkeys attack the birds, the birds need the stinging insects.
As usual in the study of wild creatures, the first thing that we encounter in the wild bird is Temperament.
On this hangs the success or failure of a species in association with man.
Temperament in the most intellectual wild creatures is just as evident and negotiable to the human eye as colors are in fur or feathers.
A vastly preponderating number of bird species are of sanguine temperament; and it is this fact alone that renders it possible for us to exhibit continuously from 700 to 800 species of birds.
Sensible behavior in captivity is the one conspicuous trait of character in which birds mentally and physically are far better balanced than mammals.
But few birds are foolishly nervous or hysterical, and when once settled down the great majority of them are sanguine and philosophical.
Birds of a great many species can be caught in an adult state and settled down in captivity without difficulty; whereas all save a few species of mammals, when captured as adults, are irreconcilable fighters and many of them die far too quickly.
In a well-regulated zoological park nearly every animal that has been caught when adult is a failure and a nuisance.
To name the species of birds that can be caught fully grown and settled down for exhibition purposes, would create a list of formidable length.
It is indeed fortunate for us that this is true; for the rearing of nestlings is a tedious task.
A conspicuous exception to the rule of philosophic sedateness in newly caught birds is the loon, or great northern diver.
That bird is so exceedingly nervous and foolish, and so persistent in its evil ways, that never once have we succeeded in inducing a loon to settle down on exhibition and be good.
When caught and placed in our kind of captivity, the loon goes daft.
It dives and dives, and swims under water until it is completely exhausted; it loses its appetite, and very soon dies.
Of course if one had a whole marine biological station to place at the disposal of the foolish loon, it might get on.
There are other odd exceptions to the rule of normal bird conduct.
Some of our upland game birds, particularly the Franklin grouse and ptarmigan of the Rocky Mountains, display real mental deficiencies in the very necessary business of self-preservation.
WILDNESS AND TAMENESS OF THE RUFFED GROUSE.
The ruffed grouse is one of the most difficult of all North American game birds to keep in captivity.
This fact is due largely, though not entirely, to the nervous and often hysterical temperament of this species.
Some birds will within a reasonable time quiet down and accept captivity, but others throughout long periods,--or forever,-- remain wild as hawks, and perpetually try to dash themselves to pieces against the wire of their enclosures.
Prof. A.
A. Allen of Cornell once kept a bird for an entire year, only to find it at the end of that time hopelessly wild; so he gave the bird its liberty.
However, in this species there are numerous exceptions.
Some wing- tipped birds have calmed down and accepted captivity gracefully and sensibly, and a few of the cases of this kind have been remarkable.
The most astonishing cases, however, have been of the tameness of free wild birds, in the Catskills, and also near the city of Schenectady.
A great many perfectly truthful stories have been published of wild birds that actually sought close acquaintance with people, and took food from their hands.
We have been asked to account for those strange manifestations, but it is impossible to do so.
It seems that in some manner, certain grouse individuals learned that Man is not always a killer and a dangerous animal, and so those birds accepted him as a friend,--until the killers came along and violated the sanctuary status.
It is both necessary, and highly desirable for the increase of species, that all wild birds should fly promptly, rapidly and far from the presence of Man, the Arch Enemy of Wild Life.
The species that persistently neglects to do so, or is unable, soon is utterly destroyed.
The great auk species was massacred and extirpated on Funk Island because it could not get away from its sordid enemies who destroyed it for a paltry supply of _oil_.
The Fool Hen and Its Folly.
In our own country there exists a grouse species so foolish in its mind, and so destitute of the most ordinary instinct of self-preservation that it has been known for many years as "the Fool Hen."
Definitely, it is the Franklin Grouse (_Conachites franklini_), and its home is in the foothills of the Rocky Mountains.
This famous and pitiable victim of misplaced confidence will sit only eight feet up on a jack pine limb, beside a well travelled road, while Mack Norboe dismounts, finds a suitable stick, and knocks the foolish bird dead from its perch.
I have seen these birds sit still and patiently wait for their heads to be shot off, one by one, with a .22 calibre revolver when all points of the compass were open for their escape.
All this, however, must be set down as an unusual and phenomenal absence of the most natural instinct of self-protection.
The pinnated grouse, sage grouse, Bob White quail and ptarmigan exercise but little keen reason in self-protection.
They are easy marks,--the joy of the pot-hunter and the delight of the duffer "sportsman."
Dullness of Instinct in Grouse and Quail.
The pinnated grouse, which in Iowa and the Dakotas positively is a migratory bird, does know enough to fly high when it is migrating, but seemingly this species and the sage grouse never will grow wise enough to save themselves from hunters when on their feeding grounds.
In detecting the presence of their arch enemy they are hopelessly dull; and they are slow in taking wing.
The quail is a very good hider, but a mighty poor flyer.
When a covey is flushed by a collection of dogs and armed men, the lightning-quick and explosive get-away is all right; but the unshot birds do not fly half far enough!
Instead of bowling away for two or three miles and getting clear out of the danger zone and hiding in the nearest timber, what do they do?
They foolishly stop on the other side of the field, or in the next acre of brush, in full view of the hunters and dogs, who find it great fun to hustle after them and in fifteen minutes put them up again.
Thus it is easy for a hunting party to "follow up" a covey until the last bird of it has been bagged.
Just before the five-year close season on quail went into effect in Iowa, this incident occurred: On a farm of four hundred acres in the southern part of the state, two gunners killed so nearly up to their bag limit of _fifty birds per day_ that in ten days they went away with 400 quail.
The foolish birds obstinately refused to leave the farm which had been their home and shelter.
Day after day the chase with dogs and men, and the fusillade of shots, went briskly on.
As a matter of fact, that outfit easily could have gone on until every quail on that farm had fallen.
It is indeed strange that the very bird which practices such fine and successful strategy in leading an intruder away from its helpless young, by playing wounded, should fail so seriously when before the guns.
A hunted quail covey should learn to post a sentry to watch for danger and give the alarm in time for a safe flight.
But I know one quail species that is a glorious exception.
It is Gambel's quail, of southern Arizona.
I saw a good wing shot, Mr. John M. Phillips, hunt that quail (without dogs) until he was hot and red, and come in with more wrath than birds.
He said, with an injured air: "The little beggars won't rise!
I don't want to shoot them on the ground, and the minute they rise above the creosote bushes they drop right down into them again, and go on running."
It was even so.
They simply will not rise and fly away, as Bob White does, giving the sportsmen a chance to kill them, but when forced to fly up clear of the bushes they at once drop back again.
[Footnote: A very few quail-killers of the East who oppose long close seasons contend that quail coveys "breed better" when they are shot to pieces every year and "scattered," but we observed that the quail of the Sonoran Desert managed to survive and breed and perpetuate themselves numerously without the benevolent cooperation of the "pump-gun" and the automatic shotgun.]
While the study of avian mentality is a difficult undertaking, this is no excuse for the fact that up to this date (1922) that field of endeavor has been only scratched on its surface.
The birds of the world are by no means so destitute of ideas and inventions that they merit almost universal neglect.
Because of the suggestions they contain we will point out a few prominent mental traits in birds, chosen at random.
At the same time, let us all beware of seeing too much, and chary of recording scientific hallucinations.
It is better to see nothing than to see many things that are not true!
In ten octavo pages that particular rock can split wide open the best reputation ever grown.
Bird Architecture.
The wisdom of birds in the selection of nesting sites, the designing of the best nest for their respective wants, and finally the construction of them, indicate instinct, reasoning power and mechanical skill of a high order.
The range from the wonderful woven homes of the weaver bird and the Baltimore oriole down to the bare and nestless incubating spot of the penguin is so great that nothing less than a volume can furnish space in which to set it forth.
But let us at least take a brief glance at a wide range of home-building activities by birds.
The orioles, caciques and weavers weave wonderful homes of fibrous material, often in populous communities.
The bower birds erect remarkable bowers, as playhouses.
The brush turkey scratches together a huge mound of sticks and leaves, four feet by ten or twelve wide at the base.
The vireo and many others turn out beautiful cup-like nests.
The hummingbird builds with the solidity and tenacity of the wasp.
The swallow is a wonderful modeler with mud.
The guacharo builds a solid nest like a cheese with a concave top.
The auklet, the puffin and the kingfishers burrow into the friendly and solid earth.
The eider duck plucks from its own breast the softest, of feather linings for its nest.
[Illustration with caption: REMARKABLE VILLAGE NESTS OF THE SOCIABLE WEAVER BIRD (Copied from "The Fauna of South Africa Birds," by Arthur C. Stark)] The grebe thoughtfully keeps its nest above high-water mark by building on a floating island.
The murre and the guillemot do their best to escape their enemies of the land by building high upon inaccessible rock ledges.
The woodpecker trusts no living species save his own, and drills high up into a hollow tree-trunk for his home.
The cactus wren and crissal thrasher build in the geographical centres of tree choyas, so protected by 500,000 spines that no hawk or owl can reach them.
This catalogue could be extended to a great length; but why pile evidence upon evidence!
It cannot be correct to assume that the nesting activities of birds are based upon instinct alone.
That theory would be untenable.
New conditions call for independent thought, and originality of treatment.
If the ancestral plans and specifications could not be varied, then every bird would have to build a nest just "such as mother used to make," or have no brood.
All bird students know full well how easily the robin, the wren, the hawk and the owl change locations and materials to meet new and strange conditions.
A robin has been known to build on the running-board of a switch-engine in a freight yard, and another robin built on the frame of the iron gate of an elephant yard.
A wren will build in a tin can, a piece of drain tile, a lantern, a bird house or a coat pocket, just as blithely as its grandmother built in a grape arbor over a kitchen door.
All this is the hall mark of New Thought.
Whenever children go afield in bird country, they are constantly on the alert for fresh discoveries and surprises in bird architecture.
Interest in the nest-building ingenuity and mechanical skill of birds is perpetual.
The variety is almost endless.
Dull indeed is the mind to which a cunningly contrived nest does not appeal.
Tell the boys that it is _all right_ to collect _abandoned_ nests, but the taking of eggs and occupied nests is unlawful and wicked.
The Play-House of the Bower Bird.
Years ago we read of the wonderful playhouses constructed by the bower birds of Australia and New Guinea, but nothing ever brought home to us this remarkable manifestation of bird thought so closely as did the sight of our own satin bower bird busily at work on his own bower.
He was quartered in the great indoor flying cage of our largest bird house, and supplied with hard grass stems of the right sort for bower-making.
With those materials, scattered over the sand floor, the bird built his bower by taking each stem in his beak, holding it very firmly and then with a strong sidewise and downward thrust slicking it upright in the sand, to stand and to point "just exactly so."
The finished bower was a Gothic tunnel with walls of grass stems, about eighteen inches long and a foot high.
In making it the male bird wrought as busily as a child building a playhouse of blocks.
Our bird would pick up pieces of blue yarn that had been placed in his cage to test his color sense, but never red,-- which color seemed to displease him.
As the bird worked quietly yet diligently, one could not help longing to know what thoughts were at work in that busy little brain.
The most elaborate of all the bower bird play-houses is that constructed by the gardener bower bird, which is thus described by Pycraft in his "History of Birds": "This species builds at the foot of a small tree a kind of hut or cabin, some two feet in height, roofed with orchid stems that slope to the ground, regularly radiating from the central support, which is covered with a conical mass of moss sheltering a gallery round it.
One side of this hut is left open, and in front of it is arranged a bed of verdant moss, bedecked with blossoms and berries of the brightest color.
As the ornaments wither they are removed to a heap behind the hut and replaced by others that are fresh.
The hut is circular and some three feet in diameter, and the mossy lawn in front of it is nearly twice that expanse.
Each hut and garden is believed to be the work of a single pair of birds.
The use of the hut, it appears, is solely to serve the purpose of a playing-ground, or as a place wherein to pay court to the female, since it, like the bowers built by its near relatives, are built long before the nest is begun, this, by  the way, being placed in a tree."
[Illustration with caption: SPOTTED BOWER-BIRD, AT WORK ON ITS UNFINISHED BOWER Foreground garnished with the bird's playthings.
(From A. S. Le Souef, Sydney.
Photo by F. C. Morse)] Most Birds Fear Man.
With the exception of those that have been reared in captivity, nearly all species of wild birds, either in captivity or out of it, fear the touch of man, and shrink from him.
The birds of the lawn, the orchard and the farm are always suspicious, always on the defensive.
But of course there are exceptions.
A naturalist like J. Alden Loring can by patient effort win the confidence of a chickadee, or a phoebe bird, and bring it literally to his finger.
These exceptions, however, are rare, but they show conclusively that wild birds can be educated into new ideas.
The shrinking of wild birds from the hand of man is almost as pronounced in captivity as it is in the wilderness, and this fact renders psychological experiments with birds extremely difficult.
It is really strange that the parrots and cockatoos all should take kindly to man, trust him and even like him, while nearly all other birds persistently fly, or run, or swim or dive away from him.
A bird keeper may keep for twenty years, feeding daily, but his hawks, owls and eagles, the perchers, waders, swimmers and upland game birds all fly from him in nervous fear whenever he attempts to handle them.
The exceptions to this rule, out of the 20,000 species of the birds of the world, are few.
Wild Birds that Voluntarily Associate with Man.
The species that will do so are not numerous, and I will confine myself to some of those that I have seen.
The Indian adjutant, the mynah, hoopoe, vulture, robin, phoebe bird, bluebird, swallow, barn owl, flicker, oriole, jay, magpie, crow, purple grackle, starling, stork, wood pigeon, Canada goose, mallard, pintail, bob white and a few other species have accepted man at his face value and endeavored to establish with him a modus vivendi.
The mallard and the graylag goose are the ancestors of our domestic ducks and geese.
The jungle fowls have given us the domestic chickens.
The wild turkey, the pheasants, the guinea fowl, the ostrich, the emu and the peacock we possess in domestication unchanged.
Caged Wild Birds Quickly Appreciate Sanctuary.
Mr. Crandall reports that in the Zoological Park there have been many instances of the voluntary return to their cages of wild birds that have escaped from them.
The following instances are cited, out of many that are remembered: A wild hermit thrush, only two weeks in captivity, escaped from an outdoor cage.
But he refused to leave the vicinity of his new home, and permanent food supply.
He lingered around for two or three days, and finally a wise keeper opened the cage door when he was near it, and at once he went in.
A magpie escaped from an outside cage, and for a week he lingered around it unwilling to leave its vicinity.
At last the other birds of the cage were removed, the door was left open, and the magpie at once went back home.
Bird Memory and Talk.
Birds have few ways and means by which to reveal their powers of memory.
The best exhibits are made by the talking parrots and cockatoos.
The feats of some of these birds, both in memory and expression, are really wonderful.
The startling aptness with which some parrots apply the language they possess often is quite uncanny.
Concerning "sound mimicry" and the efforts of memory on which they are based, Mr. Lee S. Crandall, Curator of Birds, has contributed the following statement of his observations: "Many birds, including practically all members of the parrot tribe, many of the crows and jays, as well as mynas and starlings, learn to repeat sounds, words and sentences.
Ability varies with both species and individuals.
Certain species show greater aptitude as a whole than other species, while there is a great difference between individuals of the same species.
"Gray parrots are generally considered the most intelligent of their tribe, and are especially apt at imitating sounds, such as running water, whistles, etc.
I have one at home which always answers a knock with 'Come in.'
Often he furnishes the knock himself by pounding the perch with his bill, following it with 'Come in.'
Amazon parrots are especially good at tunes, some specimens being able to whistle complicated airs and sometimes sing several verses in a high, clear voice.
Both grays and Amazons often talk with great fluency, vocabularies having been reported of as many as one hundred words.
Often there seems to be intelligent association of certain acts or conditions with corresponding sentences, these sometimes occurring with singular patness.
"Hill mynahs, of the genus _Eulabes,_ often talk as well as parrots.
The common introduced European starling often says a few words quite clearly.
I once knew a long-tailed glossy starling (_Lamprotornis caudatus_) which shared an aviary with an accomplished albino jackdaw.
The starling had acquired much of the jackdaw's repertoire, and the 'conversations' carried on between the two birds were most amusing."
A raven in the Zoological Park says "Arthur," "Shut up," "All out" and "Now look what's here" as perfectly as any parrot.
Listed in the order of their ability to learn and remember talk, the important talking birds are as follows: African gray parrot, yellow-headed Amazon, other Amazons, the hill mynahs, the cockatoos, the macaws, and the various others previously mentioned.
It is safe to assert that all migratory birds display excellent powers of memory, chiefly by returning to their favorite haunts after long absences.
Recognition of Persons.
Mr. Crandall says there can be no doubt of the ability of most birds to recognize individual persons.
This is seen in the smallest species as well as in the largest.
He once saw a bullfinch in the last stages of pneumonia and almost comatose, show an instant reaction to the presence of an owner it had not seen in weeks.
Many birds form dislikes for individual persons.
This is especially noticeable in the parrot tribe.
A large male South American condor was friendly enough with two of his keepers but would instantly attack any other keeper or other person entering his enclosure, whether wearing the uniform or not.
With his two approved keepers he was gentleness itself.
Parasitic Nesting Habits.
In the bird world there are a few species whose members are determined to get something for nothing, and to avoid all labor in the rearing of their offspring.
This bad habit is known of the Old World cuckoos, the American cow- birds, the South American rice grackle (_Cassidix_), and suspected in the pin-tail whydah (_Vidua serena_).
It seems to reach its highest point in the cuckoos.
It is believed that individuals lay their eggs only in the nests of species whose eggs resemble their own.
Apparently much skill and intelligence is required for introducing parasitic eggs at the most favorable moment.
This is equally true of other parasites.
Curator Crandall has taken several eggs and young of the rice birds from nests of two species of giant caciques in Costa Rica, but never saw an adult _Cassidix._ It is considered a very rare species, but probably is more sly than scarce.
Young cuckoos eject unwelcome nestlings shortly after hatching.
Daily contact with a large and varied collection of birds great and small, gathered from every section of the habitable regions of the earth, naturally produces in time a long series of interesting cases of intelligence and behavior.
Out of our total occurrences and observations I will offer two that reveal original thought.
Good Sense of the Wedge-Tailed Eagle.
In discussing bird intelligence with Mr. Herbert D. Atkin, keeper of our Eagles Aviary and the cranes and water birds in the Flying Cage, he called to my attention two species of birds which had very much impressed him.
Afterward he showed me all that he described.
Keeper Atkin regards the wedge-tailed eagle, of Australia, as the wisest species with which he has to deal.
In the first place, all four of the birds in that flock recognize the fact that he is a good friend, not an enemy, and each day they receive him in their midst with cheerful confidence and friendship.
In the fall when the time comes to catch them, crate them and wheel them half a mile to their winter quarters in the Ostrich House, they do not become frightened, nor fight against being handled, and submit with commendable sense and appreciation.
The one thing on which the wedge-tailed eagle really insists when in his summer quarters, is his daily spray bath from a hose.
When his keeper goes in to give the daily morning wash to the cage, the eagles perch close above his head and screech and scream until the spray is turned upon them.
Then they spread their wings, to get it thoroughly, and come out thoroughly soaked.
When the spray is merely turned upon their log instead of upon the birds as they sit higher up, they fly down and get into the current wherever it may be.
Memory of the Cereopsis Goose.
Keeper Atkin also showed me an instance of the wisdom of the cereopsis geese, from Van Diemens Land, South Australia.
During the winter those birds are kept in the Wild-Fowl Pond; but in summer they are quartered in a secluded yard of the Crane's Paddock, nearly half a mile away.
Twice a year these birds go under their own steam between those two enclosures.
When turned out of the Cranes' Paddock last November they at once set out and walked very briskly southward up the Bird's Valley, past the Zebra House.
On reaching the Service Road, a quarter of a mile away, they turned to the left and kept on to the Wolf Dens.
There they turned to the right and kept on two hundred yards until they reached the walk coming down from the Reptile House.
There they turned to the left, crossed the bridge, stopped at the gate to the Wild-Fowl Pond enclosure, and when the gate was opened they entered and declared themselves "at home."
Mr. Atkin says that in spring these birds show just as much interest in going back to their summer home.
Falconry.
We cannot do otherwise than regard the ancient sport of falconry as a high tribute to the mental powers of the genus _Falco._ The hunting falcons were educated into the sport of hawking, just as a boy is trained by his big brother to shoot quail on the wing.
The birds were furnished with hoods and jesses, and other garnitures.
They were carried on the hand of the huntsman, and launched at unlucky herons and bitterns as an _intelligent_ living force.
The hunting falcon entered into the sport like a true sportsman, and he played the game according to the rules.
The sport was cruel, but it was politely exciting, and it certainly was a fine exhibition of bird intelligence.
Part of that intelligence was instinctive, but the most of it was acquired, by educational methods.
Outstanding Traits in a Few Groups of Birds.
In creatures as much lacking in visible expression as most birds are, it is difficult to detect the emotions and temperaments that prevail in the various groups.
Only a few can be cited with certain confidence.
Vanity Displays in Birds.
The males of a few species of birds have been specially equipped by nature for the display of their natural vanity.
Anyone who has seen a Zoological Park peacock working overtime on a Sunday afternoon in summer when the crowds of visitors are greatest, solely to display the ocellated splendor of his tail plumage, surely must conclude that the bird is well aware of the glories of his tail, and also that he positively enjoys showing off to admiring audiences.
These displays are not casual affairs in the ordinary course of the day's doings.
It is a common thing for one of our birds to choose a particularly conspicuous spot, preferably on an elevated terrace, from which his display will carry farthest to the eyes of the crowd.
Even if the bird were controlled by the will of a trainer for the purpose of vanity display, the exhibition could not possibly be more perfect.
Like a good speaker on a rostrum, the bird faces first in one direction and then in another, and occasionally with a slow and stately movement it completely revolves on its axis for the benefit of those in the rear.
"Vain as a peacock" is by no means an unjustifiable comparison.
Plumage displays are indulged in by turkeys, the blue bird of paradise, the greater and lesser birds of paradise, the sage grouse and pinnated grouse, ruffed grouse, golden pheasant and argus pheasant.
On the whole, we may fairly set down vanity as one of the well defined emotions in certain birds, and probably possessed by the males in many species which have not been provided by nature with the means to display it conspicuously.
Materials for Study.
In seeking means by which to study the mental and temperamental traits of wild birds and mammals, the definite and clearly cut manifestations are so few in kind that we are glad to seize upon everything available.
Of the visible evidences, pugnacity and the fighting habit are valuable materials, because they are visible.
Much can be learned from the fighting weakness or strength of animals and men.
In our great collections of birds drawn from all the land areas of the globe, our bird men see much fighting.
Mr. Crandall has prepared for me in a condensed form an illuminating collection of facts regarding PUGNACITY IN CAPTIVE BIRDS 1.
Most species do more or less competitive fighting for nesting sites or mates, especially: Gallinaceous birds,--many of which fight furiously for mates; The Ruff, or Fighting Snipe (_Machetes pugnax_),--very pugnacious for mates; House Sparrows (_Passer domesticus_) fight for nesting places and mates; and Some Waterfowl, especially swans and geese, fight for nesting places.
2.
Most species which do not depend chiefly upon concealment, fight fiercely in defense of nests or young.
Typical examples are: Geese; Swans; The larger Flycatchers; Birds of prey, especially the more powerful ones, such as Bald Eagles, Duck Hawks and Horned Owls.
3.
Some species fight in competition for food.
Conspicuous examples are: The fiercer hawks; Some carrion eaters, as the King Vulture, Black, Sharp-Shinned, Cooper, Gos and Duck Hawks, which fight in the air over prey.
4.
Certain birds show pugnacity in connection with the robber instinct, as: Bald Eagle, which robs the Osprey; Skua and Jaeger, which rob gulls.
5.
Some species show general pugnacity.
Species to be cited are: Cassowaries, Emus and Ostriches, all of which are more or less dangerous; Saras Cranes, which strike wickedly and without warning; Some Herons, especially if confined, and Birds of Paradise, which are unreasonably quarrelsome.
6.
In non-social birds, each male will fight for his own breeding and feeding territory.
The struggle for territory is a wide one, and it is now attracting the attention of bird psychologists.
Birds are no more angelic than human beings are.
They have their faults and their mean traits, just as we have; but their repertoire is not so great as ours.
In every species that we have seen tried out in captivity, the baser passions are present.
This is equally true of mammals.
In _confinement_, in every herd and in every flock from elephants down to doves, the strong bully and oppress the weak, and drive them to the wall.
_The most philosophic and companionable birds_ are the parrots, parakeets, macaws and cockatoos.
_The birds that most quickly recognize protection_ sanctuaries and accept them, are the geese, ducks and swans.
_The game birds most nervous and foolish, and difficult to maintain in captivity,_ are the grouse, ptarmigan and quail.
_The bird utterly destitute of sense_ in captivity is the loon.
_The birds that are most domineering_ in captivity are the cranes.
_The birds that are most treacherous_ in captivity are the darters (_Anhinga_).
_The birds that go easiest and farthest in training_ are the parrots, macaws and cockatoos.
_The most beautiful bird species of the world_ are about fifty in number; and only a few of them are found among the birds of paradise.
The minds of wild birds are quite as varied and diversified as are the forms and habits of the different orders and genera.
XVI THE WISDOM OF THE SERPENT OF all the vertebrates, the serpents live under the greatest handicaps.
They are hated and destroyed by all men, they can neither run nor fly far away, and they subsist under maximum difficulties.
Those of the temperate zone are ill fitted to withstand the rigors of winter.
And yet the serpents survive; and we have not heard of any species having become extinct during our own times.
It is indeed worth while to "consider the wisdom of the serpent."
Without the exercise of keen intelligence all the snakes of the cultivated lands of the world long ago would have been exterminated.
The success of serpents of all species in meeting new conditions and maintaining their existence in the face of enormous difficulties compels us, as reasoning beings, to accord to them keen intelligence and ratiocination.
The poisonous serpents afford a striking illustration of reason and folly en masse.
The total number of venomous species is really great, and their distribution embraces practically the whole of the torrid and temperate zones.
They are too numerous for mention here; and their capacity for mischief to man is very great.
Our own country has at least eighteen species of poisonous snakes, including the rattlesnakes, the copperhead, moccasin, and coral snakes.
All these, however, are remarkably pacific.
Without exception they are non-aggressive, and they attack only when they think they are exposed to danger, and must defend themselves or die.
Hundreds of thousands, or even millions, of our people have tramped through the woods and slept in the sage-brush and creosote bushes of the rattlesnake, and waded through swamps full of moccasins, with never a bite.
In America only about two persons per year are bitten by _wild_ rattlesnakes.
Our snakes, and all but a very few of the other poison-snake species of the world, know that _it pays to keep the peace._ Now, what if all snakes were as foolishly aggressive as the hooded and spectacled cobras of India?
Let us see.
Those cobra species are man-haters.
They love to attack and do damage.
They go out of their way to bite people.
They crawl into huts and bungalows, especially during the monsoon rains, and they infest thatch roofs.
But are they wise, and retiring, like the house-haunting gopher snake of the South?
By no means.
The cobra goes around with a chip on his shoulder.
In India they kill from 17,000 to 18,000 people annually!
And in return, about 117,000 cobras are killed annually.
It is a mighty fortunate thing for humanity on the frontier that the other serpents of the world know that it is a good thing to behave themselves, and not bite unnecessarily.
Fighting Its Own Kind.
The Indian cobra, (_Naia tripudians_), is an exception to the rule of serpents that forbids fighting in the family.
While cobras in captivity usually do live together in a state of vicious and fully-armed neutrality, sometimes they do fight.
One of our cobras once attacked a cage-mate two-thirds the size of itself, vanquished it, seized it by the head and swallowed two-thirds of it before the tragedy was discovered.
The assailant was compelled to disgorge his prey, but the victim was very dead.
The poison venom of the cobra, rattlesnake, bushmaster and puff adder is a great handicap on the social standing of the entire serpent family.
Mankind in general abhors snakes, both in general and particular.
The snake not actually known to be venomous usually is suspected of being so.
It is only the strongest mental constitution that can permit a snake to go unkilled when the killing opportunity offers.
It is just as natural for the lay brother to kill a chicken snake because it looks like a copperhead, or a hog-nosed blowing "viper" because it looks like a rattlesnake, as it is to shy at a gun that "may be loaded."
To American plainsmen, the non-aggressive temper of the rattlesnake is well known, and it is also a positive asset.
I never knew one who was nervously afraid while sleeping in the open that snakes would come and crawl into his bed, or mix up with his camp.
Of course all frontiersmen kill rattlers, as a sort of bounden duty to society, but I once knew an eastern man to turn loose a rattlesnake that he had photographed, in the observance of his principle never to kill an animal whose picture he had taken.
Subsequently it was gravely reported that one of the restive horses of the outfit had "accidentally" killed that rattler by stepping upon it.
A Summary of Poisonous Snakes.
There are about 300,000 poisonous snakes in the United States, and 110,000,000 people for them to bite; but more people are bitten by captive snakes than by wild ones.
A fool and his snake are soon parted.
There are 200,000 rattlesnakes in our country, but all of them will let you alone if you will let them alone.
If your police record is clear, you can sleep safely in the sage- brush.
If ever you need to camp in a cave, remember that in warm weather the rattlesnakes are all out hunting, and will not return until the approach of winter.
The largest snakes of the world exist only in the human mind.
The rattlesnake is a world-beater at minding his own business.
Men do far more fighting per capita than any snakes yet discovered.
The road to an understanding of the minds of serpents is long and difficult.
Perhaps the best initial line of approach is through a well-stocked Reptile House.
Having studied somewhat in that school I have emerged with a fixed belief that of all vertebrate creatures, snakes are the least understood, and also the most thoroughly misunderstood.
[Illustration: A PEACE CONFERENCE WITH AN ARIZONA RATTLESNAKE "You let me alone and I won't harm you" (From "Camp-Fires on Desert and Lava")] [Illustration: HAWK-PROOF NEST OF A CACTUS WREN Placed in the centre of a tree choya cactus of Arizona and defended by 10 000 hostile spines (From "Camp-Fires on Desert and Lava")] The world at large debits serpents with being far more quarrelsome and aggressive than they really are, and it credits them with knowing far less than they do know.
Attitude of Snakes Toward Each Other.
Toward each other, the members of the various serpent species are tolerant, patient and peaceful to the last degree.
You may place together in one cage twenty big Texas rattlers, or twenty ugly cottonmouth moccasins from the Carolinas, a hundred garter snakes, twenty boa constrictors, or six big pythons, and if the various _species_ are kept separate there will be no fighting.
You may stir them up to any reasonable extent, and make them keen to strike you, but they do not attack each other.
There are, however, many species that will not mix together in peace.
For example, the king snake of New Jersey hates the rattlesnake, no matter what his address may be.
Being by habit a constrictor, the king snake at once winds himself tightly around the neck of the rattler,--and proceeds to choke him to death.
The king cobra devours other snakes, as food, and wishes nothing else.
The Gopher Snake.
Some snakes that feel sure you will not harm them will permit you to handle them without a protest or a fight.
The most spectacular example is the gopher snake of the southeastern United States.
This handsome, lustrous, blue-black species is six feet long, shiny, and as clean and smooth as ivory.
Its members are famous rat-killers.
You can pick up a wild one wherever you find it, and it will not bite you.
They do not at all object to being handled, even by timorous lady visitors who never before have touched a live snake; and in the South they are tolerated by farmers for the good they do as rat catchers.
The Wisdom of a Big Python.
Once I witnessed an example of snake intelligence on a large scale, which profoundly impressed me.
A reticulated python about twenty-two feet long arrived from Singapore with its old skin dried down upon its body.
The snake had been many weeks without a bath, and it had been utterly unable to shed its old skin on schedule time.
It was necessary to remove all that dead epidermis, without delay.
The great serpent, fully coiled, was taken out of its box, sprayed with warm water, and gently deposited on the gravel floor of our most spacious python apartment.
Later on pails of warm water, sponges and forceps were procured, and five strong keepers were assembled for active service.
The first step was to get the snake safely into the hands of the men, and fully under control.
A stream of cold water from a hose was suddenly shot in a deluge upon the python's head, and while it was disconcerted and blinded by the flood, it was seized by the neck, close behind the head.
Immediately the waiting keepers seized it by the body, from neck to tail, and straightened it out, to prevent coiling.
Strong hands subdued its struggles, and without any violence stretched the writhing wild monster upon the floor.
Then began the sponging and peeling process.
The frightened snake writhed and resisted, probably feeling sure that its last hour had come.
The men worked quietly, spoke soothingly, and the work proceeded successfully.
With the lapse of time the serpent became aware of the fact that it was not to be harmed; for it became quiet, and lay still.
At the same time, we all dreaded the crisis that we thought would come when the jaws and the head would be reached.
By the time the head was reached, the snake lay perfectly passive.
Beyond all doubt, it understood the game that was being played.
Now, the epidermis of a snake covers the entire head, _including the eyes!_ And what would that snake do when the time came to remove the scales from its eyes and lips?
It continued to lie perfectly still!
When the pulling off of the old skin hurt the new skin underneath, the head flinched slightly, just as any hurt flesh will flinch by reflex action; but that was absolutely all.
For a long hour or more, and even when the men pulled the dead scales from those eyes and lips, that strange creature made no resistance or protest.
I have seen many people fight their doctors for less.
That wild, newly-caught jungle snake quickly had recognized the situation, and acted its part with a degree of sense and appreciation that was astounding.
I do not know of any _adult wild_ mammal that would have shown that kind and degree of wisdom under similar circumstances.
Do Snakes "Charm" Birds?
Sometimes a wild bird will sit still upon its nest while a big pilot blacksnake, or some other serpent equally bad, climbs up and poises its head before the motionless and terrified bird until at last the serpent seizes the bird to devour it.
The bird victim really seems to be "charmed" by its enemy.
If there were not some kind of a hypnotic spell cast over the bird, would it not fly away?
I think this strange proceeding is easily explainable by any one with sufficient imagination to put himself in the bird's place.
It is the rule of a sitting bird to sit tight, not to be scared off by trifles, and to take great risks rather than expose her eggs to cold and destruction.
The ascent and approach of the serpent is absolutely noiseless.
Not a leaf is stirred.
The potential mother of a brood calmly sits with eyes half closed, at peace with all the world.
Suddenly, and with a horrible shock, she discovers a deadly serpent's multi-fanged head and glittering eyes staring at her _within easy striking distance._ The horrified mother bird feels that she is lost.
She knows full well that with any movement to escape the serpent instantly will launch its attack.
_Her one hope,_ and seemingly her only chance for life, is that _if she remains motionless_ the serpent will go its way without harming her.
(Think of the thousands of helpless men, women and children who have hoped and acted similarly in the presence of bandits and hold-up men presenting loaded revolvers!
But they were far from being "charmed.")
The bird hopes, and sits still, _paralyzed with fear._ At its leisure the serpent strikes; and after a certain number of horrible minutes, all is over.
I think there is no real "charm" exercised in the tragedy; but that there is on the part of the bird a paralysis of fear, which is in my opinion a well defined emotion, common in animals and in men.
I have seen it in many animals.
Snakes that Feign Death.
The common hog-nosed snake, mistakenly called the "puff-adder" and blowing "viper" (_Heterodon platyrhinus_) of the New England states, often feigns death when it is caught in the open, and picked up.
It will "play 'possum" while you carry it by its tail, head downward, or hang its limp body over a fence.
Of course it hopes to escape by its very clever ruse, and no doubt it often does so from the hands of inexperienced persons.
Do Snakes Swallow Their Young?
I _think_ not.
A number of persons solemnly have declared that they have seen snakes do so, but no _herpetologist_ ever has seen an occurrence of that kind.
I believe that all of the best authorities on serpents believe that snakes do not swallow their young.
The theory of the pro-swallowists is that the mother snake takes her young into her interior to provide for their safety, and that they do not go as far down as the stomach.
The anti-swallowists declare that the powerful digestive juices of the stomach of a snake would quickly kill any snakelets coming in contact with it; and I believe that this is true.
At present the snake-swallowing theory must be ticketed "not proven," and is filed for further reference.
The Hoop Snake Fable.
There is no such thing as a "hoop-snake" save in the vivid imaginations of a very few men.
The Intelligence of the King Cobra.
Curator of Reptiles Raymond L. Ditmars regards the huge king cobra of the Malay Peninsula, the largest of all poisonous serpents, as quite the wisest serpent known to him.
He says its mind is alert and responsive to a very unusual degree in serpents, and that it manifests a keen interest in everything that is going on around it, especially at feeding- time.
This is quite the reverse of the usual sluggish and apathetic serpent mind in captivity.
Incidentally, I would like very much to know just what our present twelve-foot cobra thought when, upon its arrival at its present home, its total blindness was relieved by the thrillingly skilful removal of the _two layers_ of dead scales that had closed over and finally adhered to each orbit.
The vision of the king cobra is keen, and its temper is not easily ruffled.
Its temperament seems to be sanguine, which is just the opposite of the nervous-combative hooded and spectacled cobra species.
The So-called "Snake Charmers" of India.
Herpetologists generally discredit the idea that a peripatetic Hindu can "charm" a cobra any farther or more quickly than any snake-keeper.
In the first place, the fangs of the serpent are totally removed,--by a very savage and painful process.
After that, the unfortunate snake is in no condition to fight or to flee.
It seeks only to be let alone, and the musical-pipe business is to impress the mind of the observer.
Serpent Psychology an Unplowed Field.
At this date (1922) we know only the rudiments of serpent intelligence and temperament.
In the wilds, serpents are most elusive and difficult to determine.
In captivity they are passive and undemonstrative.
We do not know how much memory they have, they rarely show what they think, and on most subjects we do not know where they stand.
But the future will change all this.
During the past twenty years the number of herpetologists in the United States has increased about tenfold.
It is fairly impossible that serpent psychology should much longer remain unstudied, and unrevealed along the lines of plain common- sense.
The Ways of Crocodiles.
The ways of crocodiles are dark and deep; their thoughts are few and far between.
Their wisdom is above that of the tortoises and turtles, but below that of the serpents.
I have had field experience with four species of crocodilians in the New World and three in the Old.
With but slight exceptions they all think alike and act alike.
The great salt-water crocodile of the Malay Peninsula and Borneo is the only real man-eater I ever met.
Except under the most provocative circumstances, all the others I have met are practically harmless to man.
This includes the Florida species, the Orinoco crocodile, the little one from Cuba, the alligator, the Indian gavial and the Indian crocodile (_C.
palustris_).
The salt-water crocodile, that I have seen swimming out in the ocean two miles or more from shore, is in Borneo a voracious man- eater.
It skilfully stalks its prey in the murky rivers where Malay and Dyak women and children come down to the village bathing place to dip up water and to bathe.
There, unseen in the muddy water, the monster glides up stealthily, seizes his victim by the leg, and holding it tightly backs off into deep water and disappears.
The victims are drowned, not bitten to death.
I found in Ceylon that the Indian crocodile is a shameless cannibal, devouring the skinned carcasses of its relatives whenever an opportunity offered.
The Florida crocodile is the shrewdest species of all those I know personally.
It has the strange habit of digging out deep and spacious burrows for concealment, in the perpendicular sandy banks of southern Florida rivers where the deep water comes right up to the shore.
Starting well under low-water mark, the crock digs in the yielding sand, straight into the bank, a roomy subterranean chamber.
In this snug retreat he once was safe from all his enemies,--until the fatal day when his secret was discovered, and revealed to a grasping world.
Since that time, the Alligator Joes of Palm Beach and Miami have made a business of personally conducting parties of northern visitors, at $50 per catch, to witness the adventure of catching a nine-foot crocodile alive.
The dens are located by probing the sand with long iron rods.
A rope noose is set over the den's entrance, and when all is ready, a confederate probes the crocodile out of its den and into the fatal noose.
Today the Florida crocodile is so nearly extinct that it required two years of diligent inquiry to produce one live specimen subject to purchase.
Common Sense in the Common Toad.
Last spring, in planting a lot of trees on our lawn, a round tree-hole that stood for several days unoccupied finally accumulated about a dozen toads.
Its two feet of straight depth was unscalable, and when finally discovered the toads were tired of their imprisonment.
Partly as a test of their common-sense, Mr. George T. Fielding placed a six-inch board in the hole, at an angle of about thirty degrees, but fairly leading out of the trap.
In very quick time the toads recognized the possibilities of the inclined plane and hopped upward to liberty.
In the use of this opportunity they showed more wisdom than our mountain sheep manifest concerning the same kind of an improvement designed to enable them to reach the roof of their building.
XVII THE TRAINING OF WILD ANIMALS Before we enter this chapter let us pause a moment on the threshold, and consider the logic of animal training and performances.
Logic is only another name for reason.
Its reverse side is fanaticism; and that way madness lies.
It is the duty of every sane man and woman to consider the cold logic of every question affecting the welfare of man and nature.
Fanaticism when carried to extremes can become a misdemeanor or a crime.
The soft-hearted fanaticism of humanics that saves a brutal murderer, or would-be murderer like Berkman, from the gallows or the chair, and eventually turns him loose to commit more crimes against innocent people, is not only wrong, and wicked, but in aggravated cases it is a _crime_ against society.
Just now there is a tiny wave of agitation against all performances of trained wild animals, and the keeping of animals in captivity, on the ground that all this is "cruel" and inhumane.
The Jacklondon Society of Boston is working hard to get up steam for this crusade, but thus far with only partial success.
Its influence is confined to a very small area.
Now, what is the truth of this matter?
Is it true that trained wild animals are cruelly abused in the training, or in compelling them to perform?
Is it true that in making animals perform on the stage, or in the circus ring, their rights are wickedly infringed?
Is it the duty of the American people to stop all performances by animals?
Is it wicked to make wild animals, or cats and dogs, _work_ for a living, as men and women do?
Is it true that captive animals in zoological parks and gardens are miserable and unhappy, and that all such institutions should be "abolished?"
What is truth?
In the first place, there is no sound reasoning or logic in assuming that the persons of animals, tame or wild, are any more sacred than those of men, women and children.
We hold that it is no more "cruelty" for an ape or a dog to work in training quarters or on the stage than it is for men, women and young people to work as acrobats, or actors, or to engage in honest toil eight hours per day.
Who gave to any warm-blooded animal that consumes food and requires shelter the right to live without work?
_No one!_ I am sure that no trained bear of my acquaintance ever had to work as hard for his food and shelter as does the average bear out in the wilds.
In order to find enough to eat the latter is compelled to hustle hard from dawn till dark.
I have seen that the Rocky Mountain grizzly feels forced to dig a big hole three feet deep in hard, rocky ground, to get one tiny ground squirrel the size of a chipmunk,--and weighing only eight or nine ounces.
Now, has he anything "on" the performing bear?
Decidedly not.
I regard the sentimental Jacklondon idea, that no wild animal should be made to work on the stage or in the show-ring, as illogical and absurd.
Human beings who sanely work are much happier per capita than those who do nothing but loaf and grouch.
I have worked, horse-hard, throughout all the adult years of my life; and it has been good for me.
I know that it is no more wrong or wicked for a horse to work for his living,--of course on a humane basis,--either on the stage or on the street, than it is for a coal-carrier, a foundryman, a farmer, a bookkeeper, a school teacher or a housewife to do the day's work.
The person of a wild animal is no more sacred than is that of a man or woman.
A sound whack for an unruly elephant, bear or horse is just as helpful as it is for an unruly boy who needs to be shown that order is heaven's first law.
In the presence of the world's toiling and sweating millions, in the presence of millions of children in the home sweat-shops and factories working their little lives out for their daily crust and a hard bed, what shall we think and say of the good, kind-hearted people who are spending time and energy in crusading against trained animal performances?
The vast majority of performing animals are trained by humane men and women, practicing kindness to the utmost; and they are the last persons in the world who would be willing to have their valuable stock roughly handled, neglected or in any manner cruelly treated.
So far as zoological parks and gardens are concerned, they are no more in need of defense than the Rocky Mountains.
Every large zoological park is a school of wild-animal education and training; and it is literally a continuous performance.
Let no one suppose that there is no training of wild beasts save for the circus ring and the vaudeville stage.
Of the total number of large and important mammals that come into our zoological parks, the majority of them actually are trained to play becomingly their respective parts.
An intractable and obstinate animal soon becomes a nuisance.
The following, named in the order of their importance, are the species whose zoological park training is a matter of necessity: Elephants, bears, apes, hippopotami, rhinoceroses, giraffes, bison, musk-ox, wild sheep, goats and deer, African antelopes, wild swine, and wild horses, asses and zebras.
Of large birds the most conspicuous candidates for training in park life are the ostriches, emus, cassowaries, cranes, pelicans, swans, egrets and herons, geese, ducks, pheasants, macaws and cockatoos, curassows, eagles and vultures.
Among the reptiles, the best trained are the giant tortoises, the pythons, boas, alligators, crocodiles, iguanas and gopher snakes.
Each one of these species is educated (1) to be peaceful, and not attack their keepers; (2) to not fear their keepers; (3) to do as they are bid about going here or there; (4) to accept and eat the food that is provided for them, and (5) finally, in some cases to "show off" a little when commanded, for the benefit of visitors.
All this training comes in the regular course of our daily work, and there are few animals who do not respond to it.
The necessity for training is most imperative with the elephants and bears, for without it the difficulties in the management of those dangerous animals is greatly intensified.
In training an animal to do a particular act not in the routine of his daily life, it is of course necessary to show him clearly and pointedly what is desired.
I think that in quickness of perception, and ability to adopt a new idea, the elephants and the great apes are tied for first place.
Both are remarkably quick.
It seems to me that it required only half a dozen lessons to teach our Indian elephant, Gunda, to take a penny in his trunk, lift the lid of a high-placed box, drop in the coin, then pull a bell-cord and ring a bell.
Of course the reward for the first successful performances was lumps of sugar.
Within three days this rather interesting special exhibit was working smoothly, and coining money.
As a means of working off on the poor animal great numbers of foreign copper coins, and spurious issues of all kinds, it was a great boon to the foreign population of New York.
Our erratic elephant Alice was quickly trained by Keeper Richards to blow a mouth organ, to ring a telephone by turning the crank, and to take off the receiver and hold it up to her ear for an imaginary call.
Another keeper, with no previous experience as a trainer, taught a male orang-utan called Rajah to go through a series of performances that are elsewhere described.
Bright and Dull Individuals.
Every wild animal species contains the same range of bright and dull individuals that are found in the various races of men.
Naturally the animal trainer selects for training only those animals that are of amiable disposition, that mentally are alert, responsive and possessed of good memories.
The worst mistakes they make are in taking on and forcing ill-natured and irritable animals, that hate training and performing.
Often a trainer persists in retaining an animal that resolutely should be thrown out.
Captain Bonavita lost his arm solely because of his fatal persistence in retaining in his group of lions an animal that hated him, and which the trainer well knew was dangerous.
While nearly every wild animal can be taught a few simple tricks, the dull mind soon reaches its constitutional limit.
Even among the great apes, conditions are quite the same.
One half the orang- utans are of the thin-headed, pin-headed type that is hopeless for stage training.
The good ones are the stocky, round-headed, round- faced individuals who have the cephalic index of the statesman or jurist, and a broad and well-rounded dome of thought.
Training for the Ring and the Stage.
During his long and successful career as a purveyor of wild animals for all purposes, Carl Hagenbeck had great success in the production of large animal groups trained for stage performances.
I came in close touch with his methods and their results.
His methods were very simple, and they were founded on kindness and common sense.
Mr. Hagenbeck hated whips and punishments.
When an animal could not get on without them, it was dropped from the cast.
His working theory was that an unwilling animal makes a bad actor.
There is no mystery about the best methods in training animals, wild or domestic.
The first thing is to assemble a suitable number of _young_ animals, all of which are mentally bright and physically sound.
Most adult animals are impracticable, and often impossible, because they are set in their ways.
The elephants are monumental exceptions.
A large, well-lighted and sunny room is provided; and around it are the individual cages for the student animals.
The members of the company are fed wisely and well, kept scrupulously clean, and in all ways made comfortable and contented.
When not at their work they are allowed to romp and play together until they are tired of the exercise.
The trainer who has been selected to create a specified group spends practically his entire time with his pupils.
He feeds them, and mixes with them daily and hourly.
From the beginning he teaches them that _they must obey him, and not fight._ The work of training begins with simple  things, and goes on to the complex; and each day the same routine is carried out.
To each animal is assigned a certain place in the circle, with a certain tub or platform on which to sit at ease when not acting in the ring.
It is exceedingly droll to see a dozen cub lions, tigers, bears and cheetahs sitting decorously on their respective tubs and gravely watching the thirteenth cub who is being labored with by the keeper to bring its ideas and acts into line.
The stage properties are many; and they all assist in helping the actors to remember the sequence of their acts, as well as the things to be done.
The key that controls the mind of a good animal is the reward idea.
Many a really bad animal goes through its share of the performance solely to secure the bit of meat, the lump of sugar or the prized biscuit that never fails to show up at the proper moment.
[Illustration with caption: WORK ELEPHANT DRAGGING A HEWN TIMBER The most primitive form of elephant harness.
The end of the drag rope is held between the teeth of the wise and patient animal (From A. G. R. Theobald, Mysore)] The acts to be performed are gone over in the training quarters, innumerable times; and this continues so long that by the time the "group" is ready for the stage, behold!
the cubs with which the patient and tireless trainer began have grown so large that to the audience they now seem like adult and savage animals.
Those who scoff at the wild animal mind, and say that all this displays nothing but "machines in fur" need to be reminded that this very same line of effort in training and rehearsal is absolutely necessary in the production of every military company, every ballet, and every mass performance on the stage.
There is _no_ successful performance without training.
Boys and girls require the very same sort of handling that the wild animals receive, but the humans do with a little less of it.
The man who flouts a good stage performance by wild animals on the ground that it reveals "no thought," and is only "imitation," is, in my judgment, a very short-sighted student.
Maniacs and imbeciles cannot be trained to perform any program fit to be seen.
I saw that tried fifty years ago, in "the wild Australian children," who were idiots.
_The performer must think, and reason._ Of the many groups of trained animals that I have seen in performances, my mind goes back first to the one which contained a genuine bear comedian, of the Charlie Chaplin type.
It was a Himalayan black bear, with fine side whiskers, and it really seemed to me absolutely certain that the other animals in the group appreciated and enjoyed the fun that comedian made.
He pretended to be awkward, and frequently fell off his tub.
He was purposely dilatory, and was often the last one to finish.
The other animals seemed to be fascinated by his mishaps, and they sat on their tubs and watched him with what looked like genuine amusement.
I remember another circle of seated animals who calmly and patiently sat and watched while the trainer labored with a cross and refractory leopard, to overcome its stubbornness, and to make it do its part.
Carl Hagenbeck loved to produce mixed groups of dangerous animals,--lions, tigers, leopards, bears and wolves.
One trainer whom I knew was assisted in a highly dangerous group by a noble stag-hound who habitually kept close to his master, and was said to be ready to attack instantly any animal that might attack the trainer.
I never saw a finer bodyguard than that dog.
In 1908 the most astounding animal group ever turned out of the Hagenbeck establishment, or shown on any stage, appeared in London.
It consisted of _75 full-grown polar bears!_ Now, polar bears, either for the cage or the stage, are bad citizens.
Instinctively I always suspect their mental reservations, and for twenty-one years have carefully kept our keepers out of their reach.
But Mr. William Hagenbeck, brother of the great Carl, actually trained and performed with a huge _herd_ of dangerous polars to the number stated.
In the _Strand_ magazine for April, 1908, there is a fine article by Arthur Harold about this group and its production.
It says that the bears were obtained when seven or eight months old, in large lots, and all thrown in together.
It took a keeper between seven and eight months to educate them out of their savage state,--by contact, kindness, sugar and fruit,--and then they were turned over to the trainer, Mr. Hagenbeck.
They were taught to form pyramids, climb ladders, shoot the chutes, ride in pony carriages, draw and ride in sleds, drink from bottles, and work a see-saw.
Various individuals did individual tricks.
The star performer was Monk, the wrestling bear, who went with his trainer through a fearsome wrestling performance.
Concerning the temperament of that polar bear group Mr. William Hagenbeck said: "Although I know every animal in the company, have taught each one to recognize me, and have been among many of them for _fifteen years,_ I can not now tell by their expressions the moods of the animals.
This is one of the characteristics of the polar bear.
Their expression remains the same, and it is impossible to detect by watching their faces whether they are pleased or cross.
Now in most wild animals, such as the lion, you can tell by the expression of the beast's face and by its actions whether it is in a good temper or not....
The truth is, the polar bear is a most awkward beast to train.
In the first place its character is difficult to understand.
He is by nature very suspicious, and without the least warning is apt to turn upon his trainer.
Among the seventy bears that have been taught to do tricks, _only two_ of them are really fond of their work."
In the end, Mr. William Hagenbeck was very nearly killed by one of these polar bears.
I was with Carl Hagenbeck a few hours after he received telegraphic news of the tragedy, and his bitterness against those polar bears was boundless.
I understood that Monk, the wrestling bear, was the assailant,--which was small cause for wonder.
When I saw Mr. Hagenbeck's polar bear show, it gave me shivers of fear.
The first two big male polars that we installed at our Park came from that very group, and one of them led us into a dreadful tragedy, with a female bear as the victim.
The So-Called "Trick" Performances.
Some psychologists make light of what they call "trick performances," in which the performing animals are guided by signs, or signals, or spoken commands from their trainers.
I have never been able to account for this.
It is incontestably true that dull and stupid animals can learn little, and perform less.
For example, all the training in the world could not suffice to put a pig through a performance that a chimpanzee or orang could master in two weeks.
The reason is that the pig has not the brain power that is indispensable.
A woodchuck never could become the mental equal of a wood rat (_Neotoma_).
A sheep could not hope to rival a horse, either in training or in execution.
Really, _the brain, the memory and reason must enter into every animal performance that amounts to anything worth while._ It is just as sensible to flout soldiers on the drill-ground as to wave aside as of no account a troup of trained lions or sea-lions on the stage.
Any animal that can be taught to perform difficult feats, and that delivers the goods in the blinding glare and riot of the circus ring or the stage footlights, is entitled to my profound respect for its powers of mind and nerve.
The Sea-Lion's Repertoire.
Long ago trainers recognized in the California sea-lion (_Zalophus_) a good subject for the ring and stage.
Its long, supple neck, its lithe body and brilliant nervous energy seemed good for difficult acts.
The sea-lion takes very kindly to training, and really delights in its performances.
In fact, it enters into its performance with a keen vigor and zest that is pleasing to behold.
Let this veracious record of a performance of Treat's five sea-lions and two harbor seals, that I witnessed October 15, 1910, tell the whole story, in order that the reader may judge for himself: 1.
Each sea-lion balanced upright on its nose a wooden staff 3 feet long, with a round knob on its upper end.
2.
Each sea-lion caught in its mouth a three-foot stick with a ball on each end, tossed it up, whirled it in the air, and caught it again.
This was repeated, without a miss.
3.
Each sea-lion balanced on the tip of its nose, first a ball like a baseball, then a large ball two feet in diameter.
4.
Each sea-lion climbed a double ladder of eight steps, and went down on the other side, _balancing a large ball on the end of its nose, without a miss._ 5.
The trainer handed a ball to the sea-lion nearest him, who balanced it on his nose, walked with it to his box and climbed up.
6.
Then another sea-lion walked over to him, and waited expectantly until sea-lion No.
1 tossed the ball to No.
2, who caught it on his nose, walked over to his box, climbed up, and presently tossed it to No.
3.
7.
A silk hat was balanced on its rim.
8.
A seal carrying a balanced ball scrambled upon a cylindrical basket and rolled it across the arena, after which other seals repeated the performance.
9.
In the last act a flaming torch was balanced, tossed about, caught and whirled, and finally returned to the trainer, still blazing.
Trained Horses.
By carefully selecting the brightest and most intelligent horses that can be found, it is possible for a trainer to bring together and educate a group that will go through a fine performance in public.
However, some exhibitions of trained horses are halting, ragged and poor.
I have seen only one that stands out in my records as superlatively fine,--for horses.
That was known to the public when I saw it as Bartholomew's "Equine Paradox," and it contained twelve wonderfully trained horses.
My record of this fine performance fills seven pages of a good-sized notebook.
While it is too long to reproduce here entire, it can at least be briefly described.
The trainer called his group a "school," and of it he said: "While I do not say that any one horse knows the meaning of from 300 to 400 words, I claim that _as a whole_ the school does know that number."
The performance was fairly bewildering; but by diligent work I recorded the whole of it.
Various horses did various things.
They fetched chairs, papers, hats and coats; opened desks, rang bells, came when called, bowed, knelt, and erased figures from a blackboard.
They danced a waltz, a clog dance, a figure-8; they marched, halted, paced, trotted, galloped, backed, jumped, leaped over each other, performed with a barrel, a see-saw and a double see-saw.
Their marching and drilling would have been creditable to a platoon of rookies.
In performing, every horse is handicapped by his lack of hands and plant grade feet; and the horse memory is not very sure or certain.
More than any other animal, the horse depends upon the trainer's command, and in poor performances the command often requires to be repeated, two or three times, or more.
The memory of the horse is not nearly so quick nor so certain as that of the chimpanzee or elephant.
Dr. Martin J. Potter, of New York, famous trainer of stage and movie animals, states that of all animals, wild or domestic, the horse is the most intelligent; but I doubt whether he ever trained any chimpanzees.
Speaking from out of the abundance of his training experience with many species of animals except the great apes, Dr. Potter says that "the seal [i. e. California sea-lion] learns its stage cues more easily than any other mute performer.
The horse, however, is the most intelligent of all animals in its grasp and understanding of the work it has learned to perform, and in its reliable faithfulness and memory."
Dr. Potter holds that of wild animals the tiger, owing to its treachery and ferocity, is the most difficult wild animal to train; the lion is the most reliable, and the most stupid of all animals is the pig.
The Taming of Boma.
A keeper for a short time in our place, named D'Osta, once did a very neat piece of work in taming a savage and intractable chimpanzee.
When Boma came to us, fresh from the French Congo, he was savage and afraid.
He retreated to the highest resting-place of his cage, came down only at night for his meals, and would make no compromise.
We believed that he had been fearfully abused by his former owners, and through mistreatment had acquired both fear and hatred of all men.
After the lapse of several months with Boma on that basis, the situation grew tiresome and intolerable.
So D'Osta said: "I must tame that animal, and teach him not to be afraid of us."
He introduced a roomy shifting cage into Boma's compartment, fixed the drop door, and for many days served Boma's food and water in that cage only.
For two weeks the ape eluded capture, but eventually the keeper caught him.
At first Boma's rage and fear were boundless; but presently the idea dawned upon his mind that he was not to be killed immediately.
D'Osta handed him excellent food and water, twice a day, spoke to him soothingly, and otherwise let him alone.
Slowly Boma's manner changed.
He learned that he was not to be hurt, nor even annoyed.
Confidence in the men about him began to come to him.
His first signs of friendliness were promptly met and cultivated.
At the end of ten days, D'Osta opened the sliding door, and Boma walked out, a wiser and better ape.
His bad temper and his fears were gone.
He trusted his keeper, and cheerfully obeyed him.
Strangest of all, he even suffered D'Osta to put a collar upon him, and chain him to the front bars to curb his too great playfulness while his cage was being cleaned.
Boma's fear of man has never returned.
Now, although he is big and dangerous, he is a perfectly normal ape.
The Training of an Over-Age Bear.
A bear-trainer-athlete and "bear-wrestler" named Jacob Glass once taught me a lesson that astounded me.
It related to the training of a bear that I thought was too old to be trained.
We had an Alaskan cinnamon bear, three years old, that had been christened "Christian," at Skagway, because it stood so much pestering without flying into rages, as the grizzly did.
After a short time with us, the concrete floors of our bear dens reacted upon the soles of its feet so strangely and so seriously that we were forced to transfer the animal to a temporary cage that had a wooden floor.
While I was wondering what to do with that bear, along came Mr. Glass, anxious and unhappy.
"My wrestling bear has died on me," he said, "and I've got to get another.
You have got one that I would like to buy from you.
It's the one you call Christian."
Very kindly I said, "That is a mighty fine bear, as to temper; but now he is entirely too old to train, and you couldn't do anything with him.
He would be a loss to you."
"I've looked him over, and I like his looks.
I think I can train him all right.
You let me have him, and I'll make a fine performer of him."
"I know that you never can do it; but you may try him, and send him back when you fail."
Thus ended the first lesson; and I was sure that in a month Mr. Glass would beg me to take back the untrainable animal.
About one year later Glass appeared again, jubilant.
At once he broke forth into eulogies of Christian; but one chapter would not be large enough to contain them.
He had trained that bear, with outrageous ease and celerity, and hadimmediately taken him upon the stage as a professional jiu-jitsu wrestler.
And really, the act was admirable.
As a wrestler, the bear seemed almost as intelligent as the man.
He knew the "left-hand half-nelson" as well as Glass, and he knew the following words, perfectly: "Right, left, half-nelson, strangle, head up, nose under arm, and hammer-lock."
[Illustration with caption: THE WRESTLING BEAR "CHRISTIAN" AND HIS PARTNER] Glass declared that this bear was more intelligent than any lion, or any other trained animal ever seen by him.
He was wise in many ways besides wrestling,--in his friendship with Glass, with other bears, with other men, and with a dog.
_He obeyed all orders willingly,_ even permitting Glass to take his food away when he was eating; but he would not stand being punished with a whip or a stick!
In response to that he would bite.
However, he generously permitted himself to be _held down and choked, as a punishment,_ after which he would be very repentant, and would insist upon getting into his partner's lap,--to show his good will.
Glass was enthusiastically certain that Christian could reason independently from cause to effect.
He declared that his alertness of mind was so pronounced it was very rarely necessary to show him a second time how to do a given thing.
Training an Adult Savage Monkey.
Once we had a number of Japanese red-faced monkeys, and one of the surplus adult males had a temper as red as his face.
Mr. Wormwood, an exhibitor of performing monkeys, wished to buy that animal; but I declined to sell it, on the ground that it would be impossible to train it.
At that implied challenge the trainer perked up and insisted upon having that particular bad animal; so we yielded.
He wished him for the special business of turning somersaults, because he had no tail to interfere with that performance.
Two months later Mr. Wormwood appeared again.
"Yes," he said, but not boastfully, "_I trained him;_ but I came mighty near to giving him up as a bad job.
He was the hardest subject I ever tackled; but I conquered him at last, and now he is working all right."
A really great number of different kinds of animals have been trained for stage performances, running the scale all the way up from fleas to elephants.
It is easy to recall mice, rats, rabbits, squirrels, parrots, macaws, cockatoos, crows, chickens, geese, cats, pigs, dogs, monkeys, baboons, apes, bears, seals, sea-lions, walruses, kangaroos, horses, hippopotami and elephants.
It is a large subject, and its many details are full of interest.
It is impossible to discuss here all these species and breeds.
In concluding these notes I leave off as I began,--with the statement that any student of animal psychology who for any reason whatever ignores or undervalues the intelligence of trained animals puts a handicap upon himself.
III.
THE HIGHER PASSIONS XVIII THE MORALS OF WILD ANIMALS The ethics and morals of men and animals are thoroughly comparative, and it is only by direct comparisons that they can be analyzed and classified.
It is quite possible that there are quite a number of intelligent men and women who are not yet aware of the fact that wild animals _have_ moral codes, and that on an average they live up to them better than men do to theirs.
It is a painful operation to expose the grinning skeletons in the closets of the human family, but in no other way is it possible to hold a mirror up to nature.
With all our brightness and all our talents,--real and imitation,--few men ever stop to ask what our horses, dogs and cats think of our follies and our wickedness.
By the end of the year 1921 the annual total of human wickedness had reached staggering proportions.
From August 1914 to November 1918 the moral standing of the human race reached the lowest depth it ever sounded since the days of the cave-dwellers.
This we know to be true, because of the increase in man's capacity for wickedness, and its crop of results.
After what we recently have seen in Europe and Asia, and on the high seas, let no man speak of a monster in human form as "a brute;" for so far as moral standing is concerned, some of the animals allegedly "below man" now are in a position to look down upon him.
It is a cold and horrid fact that today, all around us, and sometimes close at hand, men are committing a long list of revolting crimes such as even the most debased and cruel beasts of the field _never_ commit.
I refer to wanton wholesale murder, often with torture; assault with violence, robbery in a hundred cruel forms, and a dozen unmentionable crimes invented by degenerate man and widely practiced.
If anyone feels that this indictment is too strong, I can cite a few titles that will be quite sufficient for my case.
Let us make a few comparisons between the human species (_Homo sapiens_) and the so-called "lower" wild animals; and let it be understood that the author testifies, in courtroom phrase, only "to the best of his information and belief."
Only two wild animal species known to me,--wolves and crocodiles, --devour their own kind; but many of the races of men have been cannibals, and some are so today.
Among free wild animals, the cruel abuse or murder of children by their parents, or by other adults of the tribe, is unknown; but in all the "civilized" races of men infanticide and child murder are frightfully common crimes.
In 1921 a six-year-old Eskimo girl, whose father and mother had been murdered, was strangled by her relatives, because she had no visible means of support.
The murder of the aged and helpless among wild animals is almost unknown; but among both the savage and the civilized races of men it is quite common.
Our old acquaintance, Shack-Nasty Jim, the Modoc Indian, tomahawked his own mother because she hindered his progress; but many persons in and around New York have done worse than that.
Civil war between the members of a wild animal species is a thing unknown in the annals of wild-animal history; but among men it is an every-day occurrence.
Among _free_ animals it is against the moral and ethical codes of all species of vertebrates for the strong to bully and oppress the weak; but it is almost everywhere a common rule of action with about ten per cent of the human race.
The members of a wild animal species are in honor bound not to rob one another, but with 25 per cent of the men of all civilized races, robbery, and the desire to get something for nothing, are ruling passions.
No wild animals thus far known and described practice sex crimes; but the less said of the races of men on this subject, the better for our feelings.
Among animals, save in the warfare of carnivorous animals for their daily food, there are no exterminatory wars between species, and even local wars over territory are of very rare occurrence.
Among men, the territorial wars of tribes and nations are innumerable, they have been from the earliest historic times, and they are certain to continue as long as this earth is inhabited by man.
The "end of war" between the grasping nations of this earth is an iridescent dream, because of the inextinguishable jealousy and meanness of nations; but it is well to reduce them to a minimum.
Nations like Germany, Bulgaria, Turkey and Russia will never stand hitched for any long periods.
Their peace-loving neighbors need to keep their weapons well oiled and polished, and indulge in no hallucinations of a millenium upon this wicked earth.
In the mating season, there is fighting in many wild animal species between the largest and finest male individuals for the honor of overlordship in increasing and diffusing the species.
These encounters are most noticeable in the various species of the deer family, because the fatal interlocking of antlers occasionally causes the death of both contestants.
We have in our National Collection of Heads and Horns sets of interlocked antlers of moose, caribou, mule deer and white-tailed deer.
Otherwise than from the accidental interlocking of antlers,--due to the fact that an animal can push forward with far greater force than it can pull back,--I have never seen, heard or read of a wild animal having been _killed_ outright in a fight over the possession of females.
Fur seal and Stellar sea-lion bulls, and big male orang-utans, frequently are found badly scarified by wounds received in fighting during the breeding season, but of actual deaths we have not heard.
The first law of the jungle is: "Live, and let live."
Leaving out of account the carnivorous animals who must kill or die, _all the wild vertebrate species of the earth have learned the logic that peace promotes happiness, prosperity and long life._ This fundamentally useful knowledge governs not only the wild animal individual, but also the tribe, the species, and contiguous species.
Do the brown bears and grizzlies of Alaska wage war upon each other, species against species?
By no means.
It seems reasonably certain that those species occasionally intermarry.
Do the big sea-lions and the walruses seek to drive away or exterminate the neighboring fur seals or the helpless hair seals?
Such warfare is absolutely unknown.
Do the moose and caribou of Alaska and Yukon Territory attack the mountain sheep and goats?
Never.
Does the Indian elephant attack the gaur, the sambar, the axis deer or the muntjac?
The idea is preposterous.
Does any species of giraffe, zebra, antelope or buffalo attack any other species on the same crowded plains of British East Africa?
If so, we have yet to learn of it.
If the races and nations of men were as peace-loving, honest and sensible in avoiding wars as all the wild animal species are, then would we indeed have a social heaven upon earth.
Now, tell me, ye winged winds that blow from the four corners of the earth and over the seven seas, whence came the Philosophy of Peace to the world's wild animals?
Did they learn it by observing the ways of man?
"It is to laugh," says the innkeeper.
Man has not yet learned it himself; and therefore do we find the beasts of the field a lap ahead of the quarrelsome biped who has assumed dominion over them.
Day by day we read in our newspapers of men and women who are moral lepers and utterly unfit to associate with horses, dogs, cats, deer and elephants.
Our big male chimpanzee, Father Boma, who knows no wife but Suzette, and firmly repels the blandishments of his neighbor Fanny, is a more moral individual than many a pretty gentleman whose name we see heading columns of divorce proceedings in the newspapers.
Said the Count to Julia in "The Hunchback," "Dost thou like the picture, dearest?"
As a natural historian, it is our task to hew to the line, and let the chips fall where they will.
Among the wild animals there are but few degenerate and unmoral species.
In some very upright species there are occasionally individual lapses from virtue.
A famous case in point is the rogue elephant, who goes from meanness to meanness until he becomes unbearable.
Then he is driven out of the herd; he becomes an outcast and a bandit, and he upsets carts, maims bullocks, tears down huts and finally murders natives until the nearest local sahib gets after him, and ends his career with a bullet through his wicked brain.
In my opinion the gray wolf of North America (like his congener in the Old World) is the most degenerate and unmoral mammal species on earth.
He murders his wounded packmates, he is a greedy cannibal, he will attack his wife and chew her unmercifully.
On the other hand, his one redeeming trait is that he helps to rear the pups,--when they are successfully defended from him by their mother!
The wolverine makes a specialty of devilish and uncanny cunning and energy in destroying the property of man.
Trappers have told us that when a wolverine invades a trapper's cabin in his absence, he destroys very nearly its entire contents.
The food that he can neither eat nor carry away he defiles in such a manner that the hungriest man is unable to eat it.
This seems to be a trait of this species only,--among wild animals; but during the recent war it was asserted that similar acts were committed by soldiers in the captured and occupied villas of northern France.
The domestication of the dog has developed a new type of animal criminal.
The sheep-killing dog is in a class by himself.
The wild dog hunts in the broad light of day, often running down game by the relay system.
The sheep-killing dog is a cunning night assassin, a deceiver of his master, a shrewd hider of criminal evidence, a sanctimonious hypocrite by day but a bloody-minded murderer under cover of darkness.
Sometimes his cunning is almost beyond belief.
Now, can anyone tell us how much of this particular evolution is due to the influence of Man upon Dog through a hundred generations of captivity and association?
Has the dog learned from man the science of moral banditry, the best methods for the concealment of evidence, and how to dissemble?
Elsewhere a chapter is devoted to the crimes of wild animals; but the great majority of the cases cited were found among _captive_ animals, where abnormal conditions produced exceptional results.
The crimes of captive animals are many, but the crimes of free wild animals are comparatively few.
Whenever we disturb the delicate and precise balance of nature we may expect abnormal results.
XIX THE LAWS OF THE FLOCKS AND THE HERDS Through a thousand generations of breeding and living under natural conditions, and of self-maintenance against enemies and evil conditions, the wild flocks and herds of beasts and birds have evolved a short code of community laws that make for their own continued existence.
And they do more than that.
When free from the evil influences of man, those flock-and-herd laws promote, and actually produce, peace, prosperity and happiness.
This is no fantastic theory of the friends of animals.
It is a fact, just as evident to the thinking mind as the presence of the sun at high noon.
The first wild birds and quadrupeds found themselves beset by climatic conditions of various degrees and kinds of rigor and destructive power.
In the torrid zone it took the form of excessive rain and humidity, excessive heat, or excessive dryness and aridity.
In the temperate and frigid zones, life was a seasonal battle with bitter cold, torrents of cold rain in early winter or spring, devastating sleet, and deep snow and ice that left no room for argument.
At the same time, the species that were not predatory found themselves surrounded by fangs and claws, and the never-ending hunger of their owners.
The air, the earth and the waters swarmed with predatory animals, great and small, ever seeking for the herbivorous and traitorous species, and preferably those that were least able to fight or to flee.
The La Brea fossil beds at Los Angeles, wherein a hospitable lake of warm asphalt conserved skeletal remains of vertebrates to an extent and perfection quite unparalleled, have revealed some very remarkable conditions.
The enormous output, up to date, of skulls of huge lions, wolves, sabre-toothed tigers, bears and other predatory animals, shows, for once, just what the camels, llamas, deer, bison and mammoths of those days had to do, to be, and to suffer in order to survive.
With the aid of a little serious study, it is by no means difficult to recognize the hard laws that have enabled the elephant, bison, sheep, goats, deer, antelope, gazelles, fur-seal, walrus and others to survive and increase.
From the wild animal herds and bird flocks that we have seen and personally known, _we know what their laws are,_ and can set them down in the order of their evolution and importance.
The First Law.
_There shall be no fighting in the family, the herd or the species, at any other time than in the mating season; and then only between adult males who fight for herd leadership._ The destructiveness of intertribal warfare, either organized or desultory, must have been recognized in Jurassic times, millions of years ago, by the reptiles of that period.
Throughout the animal kingdom below man the blessings of peace now are thoroughly known.
This first law is obeyed by all species save man.
We doubt whether all the testimony of the rocks added together can show that one wild species of vertebrate life ever really was exterminated by another species, not even excepting the predatory species which lived by killing.
No one (so far as we know) has charged that the lions, or the tigers, the bears, the orcas, the eagles or the owls have ever obliterated a species during historic times.
It was the swine of civilization, transplanted by human agencies, that exterminated the dodo on the Island of Mauritius; and it was men, not birds of prey, who swept off the earth the great auk, the passenger pigeon and a dozen other bird species.
The Second Law.
_The strong members of a flock or herd shall not bully nor oppress the weak._ This law, constantly broken by degenerate and vicious men, women and children, very rarely is broken in a free wild herd or flock.
In the observance of this fundamental law, born of ethics and expediency, mankind is far behind the wild animals.
It would serve a good purpose if the criminologists and the alienists would figure out the approximate proportion of the human species now living that bullies and maltreats and oppresses the weak and the defenseless.
At this moment "society" in the United States is in a state of thoroughly imbecilic defenselessness against the new type of predatory savages known as "bandits."
The Third Law.
_During the annual period of motherhood, both prospective and actual, mothers must be held safe from all forms of molestation; and their young shall in no manner be interfered with._ For the perpetuation of a family, a clan or a species, the protection of the mothers, and their weak and helpless offspring is a necessity recognized by even the dullest vertebrate animals.
As birth-time or nesting-time approaches the wild flocks and herds universally permit the potential mothers to seek seclusion, and to work out their respective problems according to their own judgment and the means at their command.
The coming mother looks for a spot that will afford (1) a secure hiding-place, (2) the best available shelter from inclement weather, (3) accessible food and water, and (4) cover or other protection for her young.
During this period the males often herd together, and they serve a protective function by attracting to themselves the attacks of their enemies.
For the mothers, the bearing time is a truce time.
There are fox-hunters who roundly assert that in spring fox hounds have been known to refuse to attack and kill foxes about to become mothers.
The Fourth Law.
_In union there is strength; in separation there is weakness; and the solitary animal is in the greatest danger._ It was the wild species of mammals and birds who learned and most diligently observed this law who became individually the most numerous.
A hundred pairs of eyes, a hundred noses and a hundred pairs of listening ears increase about ten times the protection of the single individual against surprise attacks.
The solitary elephant, bison, sheep or goat is far easier to stalk and approach than a herd, or a herd member.
A wolf pack can attack and kill even the strongest solitary musk-ox, bison or caribou, but the horned herd is invincible.
A lynx can pull down and kill a single mountain sheep ram, but even the mountain lion does not care to attack a herd of sheep.
It is due solely to the beneficent results of this clear precept, and the law of defensive union, that any baboons are today alive in Africa.
The grizzly bear loves mountain-goat meat; but he does not love to have his inner tube punctured by the deadly little black skewers on the head of a billy.
It is the Mountain Goats' Protective Union that condemns the silvertip grizzly to laborious digging for humble little ground-squirrels, instead of killing goats for a living.
The rogue elephant who will not behave himself in the herd, and will not live up to the herd law, is expelled; and after that takes place his wicked race is very soon ended by a high- power bullet, about calibre .26.
The last one brought to my notice was overtaken by Charles Theobald, State Shikaree of Mysore, in a Ford automobile; and the car outlived the elephant.
The Fifth Law.
_Absolute obedience to herd leaders and parents is essential to the safety of the herd and of the individual; and this obedience must be prompt and thorough._ Whenever the affairs of grown men and women are dominated by ignorant, inexperienced and rash juniors, look out for trouble; for as surely as the sun continues to shine, it will come.
With an acquaintance that comprehends many species of wild quadrupeds and birds, I do not recall even one herd or flock that I have seen led by its young members.
There are no young spendthrifts among the wild animals.
For them, youthful folly is too expensive to be tolerated.
The older members of the clan are responsible for its safety, and therefore do they demand obedience to their orders.
They have their commands, and they have a sign language by which they convey them in terms that are silent but unmistakable.
They order "Halt," and the herd stops, at once.
At the command "Attention," each herd member "freezes" where he stands, and intently looks, listens and scents the air.
At the order "Feed at will," the tension slowly relaxes; but if the order is "Fly!"
the whole herd is off in a body, as if propelled by one mind and one power.
My first knowledge of this law of the flock came down to me from the blue ether when I first saw, in my boyhood, a V-shaped flock of Canada geese cleaving the sky with straight and steady flight, and perfect alignment.
Even in my boyish mind I realized that the well-ordered progress of the wild geese was in obedience to Intelligence and Flock Law.
Later on, I saw on the Jersey sands the mechanical sweeps and curves and doubles of flying flocks of sandpipers and sanderlings, as absolutely perfect in obedience to their leaders as the slats of a Venetian blind.
A herd of about thirty elephants, under the influence of a still alarm and sign signals, once vanished from the brush in front of me so quickly and so silently that it seemed uncanny.
One single note of command from a gibbon troop leader is sufficient to set the whole company in instant motion, fleeing at speed and in good order, with not a sound save the swish of the small branches that serve as the rungs of their ladder of flight.
In the actual practice of herd leadership in species of ruminant animals, the largest and most spectacular bull elk or bison is not always the leader.
Frequently it has been observed that a wise old cow is the actual leader and director of the herd, and that "what she says, goes."
This was particularly remarked to me by James McNaney during the course of our "last buffalo hunt" in Montana, in 1886.
From 1880 to 1884 he had been a mighty buffalo-hunter, for hides.
He stated that whenever as a still-hunter he got "a stand on a bunch," and began to shoot, slowly and patiently, so as not to alarm the stand, whenever a buffalo took alarm and attempted to lead away the bunch, usually it proved to be a wise old cow.
The bulls seemed too careless to take notice of the firing and try to lead away from it.
The Sixth Law.
_Of food and territory, the weak shall have their share._ While this law is binding upon all the members of a wild flock, a herd, a clan or a species, outside of species limits it may become null and void; though in actual practice I think that this rarely occurs.
Among the hoofed animals; the seals and sea-lions; the apes, baboons and monkeys, and the kangaroos, the food that is available to a herd is common to all its members.
We can not recall an instance of a species attempting to dispossess and evict another species, though it must be that many such have occurred.
In the game-laden plains of eastern Africa, half a dozen species, such as kongonis, sable antelopes, gazelles and zebras, often have been observed in one landscape, with no fighting visible.
With all but the predatory wild animals and man, the prevailing disposition is to _live, and let live._ One of the few recorded murders of young animals by an old one of the same species concerned the wanton killing of two polar bear cubs in northern Franz Joseph Land, as observed by Nansen.
The Seventh Law.
_Man is the deadliest enemy of all the wild creatures; and the instant a man appears the whole herd must fly from him, fast and far._ In some of the regions to which man and his death-dealing influence have not penetrated, this law is not yet on the statute books of the jungle and the wilderness.
Sir Ernest Shackleton and Captain Scott found it unknown to the giant penguins and sea leopards of the Antarctic Continent, I have seen a few flocks and herds by whom the law was either unknown or forgotten; but the total number is a small one.
There was a herd of mountain sheep on Pinacate Peak, a big flock of sage grouse in Montana, various flocks of ptarmigan on the summits of the Elk River Mountains, British Columbia,--and out of a long list of occurrences that is all I will now recall.
It is fairly common for the members of a vast assemblage of animals, like the bison, barren-ground caribou, fur seal, and sea birds on their nesting cliffs, to assume such security from their numbers as to ignore man; and all such cases are highly interesting manifestations of the influence of the fourth law when carried out to six decimal places.
The Eighth and Last Law.
_Whenever in a given spot all men cease to kill us, there may we accept sanctuary and dwell in peace._ This law comes as Amendment 1 to the original Constitution of the Animal Kingdom.
The quick intelligence of wild animals in recognizing a new sanctuary, and in adopting it unreservedly and thankfully as their own territory, is to all friends of wild life a source of wonder and delight.
With their own eyes Americans have seen the effects of sanctuary-making upon bison, elk, mule deer, white-tailed deer, mountain sheep, mountain goat, prong-horned antelope, grizzly and black bears, beavers, squirrels, chipmunks, rabbits, sage grouse, quail, wild ducks and geese, swans, pelicans brown and white, and literally hundreds of species of smaller birds of half a dozen orders.
In view of this magnificent and continent-wide manifestation of discovery, new thought and original conclusion, let no man tell us that the wild birds and quadrupeds "do not think" and "can not reason."
The Exceptions of Captivity.
When wild animals come into captivity, a few individuals develop and reveal their worst traits of character, and much latent wickedness comes to the surface.
A small percentage of individuals become mean and lawless, and a still smaller number show criminal instincts.
These Bolshevistic individuals commit misdemeanors and crimes such as are unknown in the wild state.
One male ruminant out of perhaps fifty will turn murderer, and kill a female or a fawn, entirely contrary to the herd law; and at long intervals a male predatory animal kills his mate or young.
Occasionally captivity warps wild animal or wild bird character quite out of shape, though it is a satisfaction to know that the total proportion of those so affected is very small.
Long and close confinement in a prison-like home, filled with more daily cares and worries than any animal cage has of iron bars, has sent many a human wife and mother to an insane asylum; but the super- humanitarians who rail out at the existence of zoological parks and zoos are troubled by that not at all.
XX PLAYS AND PASTIMES OF ANIMALS I approach this subject with a feeling of satisfaction; but I would not like to state the number of hours that I have spent in watching the play of our wild animals.
Out in the wilds, where the bears, sheep and goats live and thrive, the outdoorsmen see comparatively few wild animals at play.
No matter what the season, the dangers of the wilderness and mountain summit remain the same.
When kids and lambs are young, the eaglets are hungriest, and their mothers are most determined in their hunting.
After September 1, the deadly still-hunters are out, and strained watchfulness is the unvarying rule, from dawn until dark.
Out in the wilds, it is the _moving_ animal that instantly catches every hostile eye within visual range.
A white goat kid vigorously gamboling on the bare rocks would attract all the golden eagles, hunters, trappers and Indians within a radius of two miles.
It is the rule that kids, fawns and lambs must _lie low and keep still,_ to avoid attracting deadly enemies.
On the bare summits, play can be indulged in only at great risk.
Generations of persecution have implanted in the brain of the ruminant baby the commanding instinct to fold up its long legs, neatly and compactly, furl its ears along its neck, and closely lie for hours against a rock or a log.
During daylight hours they must literally hug the ground.
Silence and inactivity is the first price that all young animals in the wilds pay for their lives.
It is only in the safe shelter of captivity, or man-made sanctuaries, that they are free to play.
In the comfortable security of the "zoo" all the wild conditions are changed.
The restraints of fear are off, and every animal is free to act as joyous as it feels.
Here we see things that men _never see in the wilds!_ If any Rocky Mountain bear hunter should ever see bear cubs or full-grown bears wrestling and carrying on as they do here, he would say that they were plumb crazy!
Of all our wild animals, not even excepting the apes and monkeys, our young bears are the most persistently playful.
In fact, I believe that when _properly caged and tended,_ bears under eight years of age are the most joyous and playful of all wild animals.
We have given our bears smooth and spacious yards floored with concrete, with a deep pool in the centre of each, and great possibilities in climbing upon rocks high and low.
The top of each sleeping den is a spacious balcony with a smooth floor.
The facilities for bear wrestling and skylarking are perfect, and there are no offensive uneven floors nor dead stone walls to annoy or discourage any bear.
They can look at each other through the entire series of cages and there is no chance whatever for a bear to feel lonesome.
We put just as many individuals into each cage as we think the traffic will stand; and sometimes as many as six young bears are reared together.
Now, all these conditions promote good spirits, playfulness, and the general enjoyment of life.
Any one who thinks that our bears are not far happier than those that are in the wilds and exposed to enemies, hunger and cold, should pause and consider.
Our bear cubs begin to play just as soon as they emerge from their natal den, in March or April, and they keep it up until they are six or seven years of age,--or longer!
Our visitors take the playfulness of small cubs as a matter of course, but the clumsy and ridiculous postures and antics of fat-paunched full-grown bears are irresistibly funny.
Really, there are times when it seems as if the roars of laughter from the watching crowd stimulates wrestling bears to further efforts.
On October 28, 1921, about seventy boys stood in front of and alongside the den of two Kluane grizzly cubs and shouted for nearly half an hour in approval and admiration of the rapid and rough play of those cubs.
[Illustration with caption: ADULT BEARS AT PLAY] The play of bears, young or middle-aged, consists in boxing, catch-as-catch-can wrestling, and chasing each other to and fro.
Cubs begin to spar as soon as they are old enough to stand erect on their hind feet.
They take their distance as naturally as prize-fighters, and they strike, parry and dodge just as men do.
They handle their front feet with far more dexterity and precision than boys six years of age.
Boxing bears always strike for the head, and bite to seize the cheek of the opponent.
In biting, mouth meets mouth, in defense as well as attack.
When a biting bear makes a successful pass and finally succeeds in getting a firm toothhold on the cheek of his opponent, the party of the second part promptly throws himself prone upon the ground, and with four free feet concentrated upon the head of the other bear forces him to let go.
This movement, and the four big, flat foot soles coming up into action is, in large bears, a very laughable spectacle, and generally produces a roar.
Wrestling bears roll over and over on the ground, clawing and biting, until one scrambles up, and either makes a new attack or rushes away.
Bears love to chase one another, _and be chased;_ and in this form of skylarking they raise a whirlwind of activity which leads all around the floor, up to the balcony and along the length of it, and plunges down at the other end.
Often a bear that is chased will fling himself into the bathing pool, with a tremendous splash, quickly scramble out again and rush off anew in a swirl of flying water.
The two big male polar bears that came to us from the William Hagenbeck group were very fond of playing and wrestling in the water of their swimming pool.
Often they kept up that aquatic skylarking for two hours at a stretch, and by this constant claw work upon each other's pelts they kept their coats of hair so thinned down that we had to explain them.
One bear had a very spectacular swimming trick.
He would swim across the pool until his front feet touched the side, then he would throw himself over backwards, put his hind feet against the rock wall, and with a final shove send himself floating gracefully on his back across to the other side.
Playful bears are much given to playing tricks, and teasing each other.
A bear sleeping out in the open den is regarded as a proper subject for hectoring, by a sudden bite or cuff, or a general assault.
It is natural to expect that wrestling bears will frequently become angry and fight; but such is not the case.
This often happens with boys and men, but bears play the game consistently to the end.
I can not recall a single instance of a real bear fight as the result of a wrestling or boxing match; and may all boys take note of this good example from the bear dens.
Next to the bears, the apes and monkeys are our most playful animals.
Here, also, it is the young and the half grown members of the company that are most active in play.
Fully mature animals are too sedate, or too heavy, for the frivolities of youth.
A well- matched pair of young chimpanzees will wrestle and play longer and harder than the young of any other primate species known to me.
It is important to cage together only young apes of equal size and strength, for if there is any marked disparity in size, the larger and stronger animal will wear out the strength of its smaller cage-mate, and impair its health.
In playing, young chimps, orangs or monkeys seize each other and wrestle, fall, and roll over and over, indefinitely.
They make great pretenses of biting each other, but it is all make-believe.
My favorite orang-utan pet in Borneo loved to play at biting me, but whenever the pressure became too strong I would say chidingly, "Ah!
Ah!"
and his jaws would instantly relax.
He loved to butt me in the chest with his head, make wry faces, and make funny noises with his lips.
I tried to teach him "cat's cradle" but it was too much for him.
His clumsy fingers could not manage it.
One of our brightest chimpanzees, named Baldy, was much given to hectoring his female cage-mate, for sport.
What he regarded as his best joke was destroying her bed.
Many times over, after she had laboriously carried straw up to the balcony, carefully made up a nice, soft, circular bed for herself, and settled down upon it for a well-earned rest, Baldy would silently climb up to her level, suddenly fling himself upon her as she lay, and with all four of his arms and legs violently working, the nest would be torn to pieces and scattered and the lady orang rudely pulled about.
Then Baldy would joyously swing down to the lower level, settle himself demurely at the front of the cage, and with a placid face and innocent, far-away expression in his eyes gaze at the crowd.
There was nothing lacking but a mischievous wink of one eye.
Whenever his cage-mate selected a particularly long and perfect straw and placed it crosswise in her mouth, Baldy would steal up behind her and gleefully snatch it away.
Baldy was a born comedian.
He loved to amuse a crowd and make people laugh.
He would go through a great trapeze performance of clownish and absurd gymnastics, and often end it with three or four loud smacks of his big black feet against the wall.
This was accomplished by violent kicking backwards.
His dancing and up-and- down jumping always made visitors laugh, after which he would joyously give his piercing "_Wah-hoo_" shout of triumph.
A Sioux Indian squaw dances by jumping up and down, but her performance is lifeless in comparison.
No vaudeville burlesque dancer ever cut a funnier monkey shine than the up-and-down high-jump dance and floor-slapping act of our Boma chimpanzee (1921).
Boma offers this whenever he becomes especially desirous of entertaining a party of distinguished visitors.
In stiff dancing posture, he leaps high in the air, precisely like a great black jumping-jack straight from Dante's Inferno.
Orangs love to turn somersaults, and some individuals are so persistent about it as to wear the hair off their backs, disfigure their beauty, and disgust their keepers.
In the chapter on "Mental Traits of the Gorilla" a descriptionis given of the play of Major Penny's wonderful John Gorilla.
When many captive monkeys are kept together in one large cage containing gymnastic properties, many species develop humor, and indulge in play of many kinds.
They remind me of a group of well- fed and boisterous small boys who must skylark or "bust."
From morning until night they pull each other's tails, wrestle and roll, steal each other's playthings, and wildly chase each other to and fro.
There is no end of chattering, and screeching, and funny facial grimaces.
A writer in _Life_ once said that the sexes of monkeys can be distinguished by the fact that "the females chatter twice as fast as the males," but I am sure that many ladies will dispute that statement.
In a company of mixed monkeys, or a mixed company of monkeys, a timid and fearsome individual is often made the butt of practical jokes by other monkeys who recognize its weakness.
And who has not seen the same trait revealed in crowds of boys?
But we can linger no longer with the Primates.
Who has not seen squirrels at play?
Once seen, such an incident is not soon forgotten.
I have seen gray, fox and red squirrels engage in highly interesting performances.
The gray squirrel is stately and beautiful in its play, but the red squirrel is amazing in its elaborateness of method.
I have seen a pair of those mischief- makers perform low down on the trunk of a huge old virgin white oak tree, where the holding was good, and work out a program almost beyond belief.
They raced and chased to and fro, up, down and across, in circles, triangles, parabolas and rectangles, until it was fairly bewildering.
Really, they seemed to move just as freely and certainly on the tree-trunk as if they were on the ground, with no such thing in sight as the law of gravitation.
It seems to me that the gray squirrel barks and the red squirrel chatters, scolds, and at times swears, chiefly for the fun of hearing himself make a noise.
In the red squirrel it is impudent and defiant; and usually you hear it near your camp, or in your own grounds, where the rascals know that they will not be shot.
The playful spirit seems to be inherent in the young of all the Felidae.
The playfulness of lion, tiger, leopard and puma cubs is irresistibly pleasing; and it is worth while to rear domestic kittens in order to watch their playful antics.
I have been assured by men who seemed to know, that wolf and fox cubs silently play in front of their home dens, when well screened from view, just as domestic dog puppies do; and what on earth can beat the playfulness of puppies of the right kind, whose parents have given them red blood instead of fat as their inheritance.
Interesting books might be written about the play of dogs alone.
The play of the otter, in sliding down a long and steep toboggan slide of wet and slippery earth to a water plunge at the bottom, is well known to trappers, hunters, and a few naturalists.
It is quite celebrated, and is on record in many places.
I have seen otter slides, but never had the good luck to see one in use.
The otters indulge in this very genuine sport with just as much interest and zest as boys develop in coasting over ice and snow with their sleds.
Here at the Zoological Park, young animals of a number of species amuse themselves in the few ways that are open to them.
It is a common thing for fawns and calves of various kinds to butt their mothers, just for fun.
A more common form of infantile ruminant sport is racing and jumping.
Now and then we see a red buffalo calf three or four months old suddenly begin a spell of running for amusement, in the pure exuberance of health and good living.
A calf will choose a long open course, usually up and down a gentle slope, and for two hundred feet or more race madly to and fro for a dozen laps, with tail stiffly and very absurdly held aloft.
Of course men and beasts all pause to look at such performances, and at the finish the panting and perspiring calf halts and gazes about with a conscious air of pride.
All this is deliberate "showing off," just such as small boys frequently engage in.
Elk fawns, and more rarely deer fawns, also occasionally indulge in similar performances.
Often an adult female deer develops the same trait.
One of our female Eld's deer annually engages in a series of spring runs.
We have seen her race the full length of her corral, up and down, over a two hundred foot course, at really break-neck speed, and keep it up until her tongue hung out.
Years ago, in the golden days, I was so lucky as to see several times wonderful dances of flocks of saras cranes on the low sandy islets in the River Jumna, northern India, just below Etawah.
It was like this: While the birds are idly stepping about, apropos of nothing at all, one suddenly flaps his long wings several times in succession, another jumps straight up in the air for a yard or so, and presto!
with one accord the whole flock is galvanized into action.
They throw aside their dignity, and real fun begins.
Some stand still, heads high up, and flap their wings many times.
Others leap in the air, straight up and down, one jump after another, as high as they can go.
Others run about bobbing and bowing, and elaborately courtesying to each other with half opened wings, breasts low down and their tails high in the air, cutting very ridiculous figures.
In springtime in the Zoological Park we often see similar exhibitions of crane play in our large crane paddock.
A particularly joyous bird takes a fit of running with spread wings, to and fro, many times over, and usually one bird thus performing inspires another, probably of his own kind, to join in the game.
The other cranes look on admiringly and sometimes a spectator shrilly trumpets his approval.
In his new book, "The Friendly Arctic," Mr. Vilhjalmur Stefansson records an interesting example of play indulged in jointly by a frivolous arctic fox and eight yearling barren-ground caribou.
It was a game of tag, or its wild equivalent.
The fox ran into and through the group of caribou fawns, which gave chase and tried to catch the fox, but in vain.
At last the fawns gave up the chase, returned to their original position, and came to parade rest.
Then back came the fox.
Again it scurried through the group in a most tantalizing manner, which soon provoked the fawns to chase the fox anew.
At the end of this inning the caribou again abandoned the chase, whereupon the fox went off to attend to other affairs.
On the whole, the play of wild animals is a large field and no writer will exhaust it with one chapter.
Very sincerely do we wish that at least one of the many romance writers who are so industriously inventing wild-animal blood-and-thunder stories would do more work with his eyes and less with his imagination.
XXI COURAGE IN WILD ANIMALS Either in wild animals or tame men, courage is the moral impulse that impels an individual to fight or to venture at the risk of bodily harm.
Like Theodore Roosevelt, the truly courageous individual engages his adversary without stopping to consider the possible consequences to himself.
The timid man shrinks from the onset while he takes counsel of his fears, and reflects that "It may injure me in my business," or that "It may hurt my standing;" and in the end he becomes a slacker.
Among the mental traits and passions of wild creatures, a quantitative and qualitative analysis of courage becomes a highly interesting study.
We can easily fall into the error of considering that fighting is the all-in-all measure of courage; which very often is far from being true.
The mother quail that pretends to be wounded and feigns helplessness in order to draw hostile attention unto herself and away from her young, thereby displays courage of a high order.
No quail unburdened by a helpless brood requiring her protection ever dreams of taking such risks.
The gray gibbons of Borneo, who quite successfully made their escape from us, but promptly returned close up to my party in response to the S. O. S. cries of a captured baby gibbon, displayed the sublime courage of parental affection, and of desperation.
Wary, timid and fearfully afraid of man, at the first sight of a biped they swing away.
At the first roar of a gun they literally fly down hill through the treetops, and vanish in a wild panic.
And yet, the leading members of that troop halted and swiftly came back, piercing the gloom and silence of the forest with their shrill cries of mingled encouragement and protest.
It was quite as courageous and heroic as the act of a father who rushes into a burning building to save his child, at the imminent risk of his own life.
The animal world has its full share of heroes.
Also, it has its complement of pugilists and bullies, its cowards and its assassins.
Few indeed are the wild creatures that fight gratuitously, or attack other animals without cause.
If a fight occurs, look for the motive.
The wild creatures know that peace promotes happiness and long life.
Now, of all wild quadrupeds, it is probable that the African baboons are pound for pound the most pugnacious, and the quickest on the draw.
The old male baboon in his prime will fight anything that threatens his troop, literally at the drop of a hat.
But there is method in his madness.
He and his wives and children dwell on the ground in lands literally reeking with fangs and claws.
He has to confront the lion, leopard, wild dog and hyena, and make good his right to live.
No wonder, then, that his temper is hot, his voice raucous and blood-curdling; his canines fearfully long and sharp, and his savage yell of warning sufficient to keep even the king of beasts off his grass.
Once I saw two baboons fight.
We had two huge and splendid adult male gelada baboons, from Abyssinia.
They were kept separate, but in adjoining cages; and the time came when we needed one of those cages for another distinguished arrival.
We decided to try the rather hazardous experiment of herding those two geladas together.
Accordingly, we first opened the doors to both outside cages, to afford for the moment a free circulation of baboons, and then we opened the partition door.
Instantly the two animals rushed together in raging combat.
With a fierce grip each seized the other by the left cheek; and then began a baboon cyclone.
They spun around on their axis, they rolled over and over on the floor, and they waltzed in speechless rage over every foot of those two cages.
Strange to say, beyond coughing and gasping they made no sounds.
Never before had we witnessed such a fearsome exhibition of insane hatred and rage.
As soon as the horrified spectators could bring it about, the wild fighters were separated; and strange to say, neither of them was seriously injured.
It was a drawn battle.
It is quite difficult to weigh and measure the independent and abstract courage inherent in any wild animal species.
All that can be done is to grope after the truth.
On this subject there can be almost as many different opinions as there are species of wild animals.
What animal will go farthest in daring and defying man, even the man with a gun, in foraging for food?
Unquestionably and indisputably, the lion.
This is no idle repetition of an old belief, or tradition.
It is a fact; and we say this quite mindful of the records made by the grizzly bear, the Alaskan brown bear, the tiger, the leopard and the jaguar.
"The Man-Eaters of Tsavo" opened up a strange and new chapter in the life history of the savage lion.
That truthful record of an astounding series of events showed the lion in an attitude of permanent aggression, backed by amazing and persistent courage.
For several months in that rude construction camp on the arid bank of the Tsavo River, where a railway bridge was being constructed on the famous Uganda Railway line of British East Africa, lions and men struggled mightily and fought with each other, with living men as the stakes of victory.
The book written by Col. J.H.
Patterson, under the title mentioned above, tells a plain and simple story of the nightly onslaughts of the lions, the tragedies suffered from them, the constant, the desperate though often ill-consideredefforts of the white engineers to protect the terrorized black laborers, and finally the death of the man- eaters.
During a series of battles lasting four long months the two lions _killed and carried of a total of twenty-eight men!_ How many natives were killed and not reported never will be known.
The most hair-raising episode of all had a comedy touch, and fortunately it did not quite end in a tragedy.
This is what happened: Col. Patterson and his staff decided to try to catch the boldest of the lions in a trap baited with _a living man._ Accordingly a two-room trap was built, one room to hold and protect the man-bait, the other to catch and hold the lion.
A very courageous native consented to be "it," and he was put in place and fastened up.
The lion came on schedule time, he found the live bait, boldly entered the trap to seize it, and the dropping door fell as advertised.
When the lion found himself caught, did his capture trouble him?
Not in the least.
Instead of starting in to tear his way out he decided to postpone his escape until he had torn down the partition and eaten the man!
So at the partition he went, with teeth and claws.
In mortal terror the live bait yelled for succor.
In "the last analysis" the man was saved from the lion, but the lion joyously tore his way out and escaped without a scratch.
So far from being daunted by this divertisement he continued his man-killing industry, quite as usual.
Now, the salient points of the man-eaters of Tsavo consist of the unquenchable courage of the two lions, and their persistent defiance of white men armed with rifles.
I am sure that there is nowhere in existence another record of wild-animal courage equal to this, and the truthfulness of it is quite beyond question.
The annals of African travel and exploration contain instances innumerable of the unparalleled courage of the lion in taking what he wants when he wants it.
THE GRIZZLY BEAR'S COURAGE.
As a subject, this is a hazardous risk, because so many men are able to tell all about it.
Judging from reliable records of the ways and means of the grizzly bear, I think we must award the second prize for courage to "Old Ephraim."
The list of his exploits in scaring pioneers, in attacking hunters, in robbing camps, and finally in bear- handling and almost killing two guides in the Yellowstone Park, is long and thrilling.
The record reaches back to the days of Lewis and Clark, who related many wild adventures with bears.
The grizzlies of their day were very courageous, but even then they were _not_ greatly given to attacking men quite unprovoked!
In those days of bow-and-arrow Indians, and of white men armed only with ineffective muzzle-loading pea rifles, using only weak black powder, the grizzlies had an even chance with their human adversaries, and sometimes they took first money.
In those days the courage of the grizzly was at its highest peak; and it was then conceded by all frontiersmen that the grizzly was thoroughly courageous, and always ready to fight.
In the light of subsequent history, and in order to be just to the grizzly, we claim that his fighting was _in self defense,_ for even in those days the unwounded bear preferred to run rather than to fight unnecessarily.
The rise of the high-power, long-range repeating rifle has made the grizzly bear a different animal from what he was in the days of Lewis and Clark.
He has learned, _thoroughly,_ the supreme deadliness of man's new weapons, and he knows that he is no longer able to meet men on even terms.
Consequently, he runs, he hides, he avoids man, everywhere save in the Yellowstone Park, where he has found out that firearms are prohibited.
There he has broken the truce so often that his offenses have had to be met with stern disciplinary measures that have made for the safety of tourists and guides.
Once I saw an amusing small incident.
Be it known that when a new black bear cub is introduced to a den of its peers, the newcomer shrinks in fright, and cowers, and takes its place right humbly.
But species alter cases.
Once when we received an eight-months- old grizzly cub we turned it loose in a big den that contained five black bear cubs a year older than itself.
But did the grizzly cub cower and shrink?
By no manner of means.
With head fully erect, it marched calmly to the centre of the den, and with serene confidence gave the other cubs the once-over with an air that plainly said: "_I'm_ a grizzly!
I'm here, and I've come to stay.
Do I hear any objections?"
Quite as if in answer to the challenge, an eighteen-months-old black bear presently sidled up and made a trial blow at the grizzly's head.
Instantly the grizzly cub's right arm shot out a well-delivered blow that sent the black one scurrying away in a panic, and perceptibly cleared the atmosphere.
That cub had grizzly-bear _courage_ and _confidence;_ that was all.
There are a number of American sportsmen who esteem the Cape buffalo as the most aggressive and dangerous wild animal in eastern Africa.
He is so courageous and so persistently bold that he is much given to lying in wait for hunters and attacking with real fury.
The high grass of his swamps is very helpful to him as a means of defense.
In our National Collection of Heads and Horns there is a huge buffalo head (for years the world's highest record) that tells the story of a near tragedy.
The brother of Mr. F.H.
Barber, of South Africa, fired at the animal, but failed to stop it.
His gun jammed, and the charging beast was almost in the act of killing him when F.H.
Barber fired without pausing to take aim.
His lucky bullet knocked a piece out of the buffalo's left horn, dazed the animal for a moment, and afforded time for the shot that killed the mighty bull.
The leopard is usually a vicious beast.
When brought to bay it fights with great fury and success.
The black leopard is supremely vicious and intractable.
Nearly all leopards hate training, and I have seen two or three leopard "acts" that were nerve-racking to witness because of the clear determination of all the animals to kill their trainer at the first opportunity.
The status of the big Alaskan brown bear has already been referred to in terms that may stand as an estimate of its courage.
Really, it is now in the same mental state as the grizzly bears of the days of Lewis and Clark, and the surplus must be shot to admonish the survivors and protect the rights of man.
THE RAGE OF A WILD BULL ELK.
One of the most remarkable cases of rage, resentment and fighting courage in a newly captured wild animal occurred near Buttonwillow, California, in November 1904, and is very graphically described by Dr. C. Hart Merriam in the _Scientific Monthly_ for November 1921.
The story concerns the leader of a band of the small California Valley Elk (_Cervus nannodes_) which it was desired to transport to Sequoia Park, for permanent preservation.
The bull refused to be driven to the corral for capture, so he was roped, thrown, hog-tied and hauled six miles on a wagon.
This indignity greatly enraged the animal.
At the corral he was liberated for the purpose of driving him through a chute and into a car.
From his capture and the jolting ride the bull was furious, and he refused to be driven.
His first act was to gore and mortally wound a young elk that unfortunately found itself in the corral with him.
Then he was roped again and his horns were sawn off.
At first no horseman dared to ride into the corral to attempt to drive the animal.
Finally the leader of the cowboys, Bill Woodruff, mounted on a wise and powerful horse who knew the game quite as well as his rider, rode into the corral with the raging elk, and attempted to drive it.
The story of the fight that followed, of raging elk vs. horse and man, makes stories of Spanish bullfights seem tame and commonplace, and the adventure of St. George and the dragon a dull affair.
With the stubs of his antlers the bull charged the horse again and again, inflicting upon the splendid animal heart-rending punishment.
Finally, after a fearful conflict, the wise and brave horse conquered, and the elk devil was forced into the car.
After a short railway journey the elk was forced into a crate,-- fighting at every step,--and hauled a two days' journey to the Park.
Reduced to kicking as its sole expression of resentment, the animal kicked continuously for forty-eight hours, almost demolishing the crate.
The final scene of this unparalleled drama of wild-animal rage is thus described by Dr. Merriam: "Then the other gates were raised, giving the bull an opportunity to step out.
For the first, time since his capture he did what was wanted; he voluntarily crept to the rear of the wagon and hobbled out on the ground.
Looking around for an enemy to attack and not seeing any, --some of the men having stationed themselves outside the park fence, the others on top of the crate,--he set out for the river, only a few rods away.
"His courage had not forsaken him, but his strength had.
He was no longer the proudly aggressive wild beast he had been.
He had reached his limit.
The terrible ordeal he had been through; the struggle incident to his capture; the rough, hot ride to the corral, hog-tied, on the hard floor of the dead-ax wagon; the outbursts of passion in the corral; the fighting and second roping in connection with the sawing off of his horns; the battle with the big horse; the ceaseless violence of his destructive assaults, first in the car, then in the crate, continued for three days and nights, had finally undermined even his iron frame; so when at last he found himself free on the ground, he presented a truly pitiful picture.
"With his head bent to one side and back curved, with one ear up and the other down, and with a dejected, helpless expression on his face, he hobbled wearily away, barely able to step without falling.
Slowly he made his way to the river, waded in, drank, crossed to the far side, staggered laboriously up the low bank, and lay down.
The next day he was found in the same spot,--dead."
THE DEFENSE OF THE HOME AND FAMILY.
Any man who is too cowardly to fight for his home and country deserves to live and die homeless and without a country.
With this subject of courage the parental and fraternal affections of wild animals are inseparably linked.
The defense of the home and family unit is the foundation of all courage, and of all fighting qualities in man or animals.
The gospel of self-defense is the first plank in the platform of the home defenders.
Obviously, the head of a family cannot permit himself to be knocked out, because as the chief fighter in the Home Defense League it is his bounden duty to preserve his strength and his weapons, and remain fit.
In the days of the club, the stone axe and the flint arrow-head, men were few and feeble, and the wild beasts had no cause to fear extermination.
Tooth, claw and horn were about as formidable as the clumsy and inadequate weapons of man.
The wild species went on developing naturally, and some mighty hosts were the result.
But gunpowder changed all that.
In the chase it gave weak men their innings beside the strong.
Man could kill at long range, with little danger to himself, or even with none at all.
And then in the wild beast world the great final struggle for existence began.
Man's flippant phrase,--"the survival of the fittest,"-- became charged with sinister and deadly meaning.
But for Mother Love among wild creatures, species would not multiply, and the earth soon would become depopulated.
In the entire Deer Family of the world, the annual shedding of all horns is Nature's tribute to motherhood in the herd.
A buck deer or a bull moose is a domineering master--so long as his antlers remain upon his head.
But with the approach of fawn-bearing time in the herd, down they go.
I have seen a bull elk stand with humbly lowered head, and gaze reproachfully upon his fallen antlers.
The dehorned buck not only no longer hectors and drives the females, but in fear of hurting his tender new velvet stubs he keeps well away from the front hoofs of the cows.
The calves grow up quite safe from molestation within the herd.
It may be set down as a basic truth that all vertebrate animals are ready to defend their homes and their young against all enemies that do not utterly outclass them in size and strength.
Of course we do not expect the pygmy to try conclusions with the giant, but at the same time, wild creatures have their own queer ways of defense and counter-attack, and of matching superior cunning against superior force.
But now, throughout the animal world, the fear of man is paramount.
Nearly all the wild ones have learned it.
It is only the enraged, the frightened or the cornered bear, lion, tiger or elephant that charges the Man with a Gun, and seeks to counter upon him with fang and claw before it drops.
The deadly supremacy of the repeating rifle that kills big game at half a mile, and the pump shotgun that gets five geese out of a flock, are well recognized by the terrorized big game and small game that flies before the sweeping pestilence of machine guns and automobiles.
THE FIGHTING CANADA GOOSE.
In essaying to illustrate the home defense spirit, my memory goes out to one truculent and fearless Canada goose whose mate elected to nest in a horribly exposed spot on the east bank of our Wild-Fowl Pond.
The location was an error in judgment.
As soon as the nest was finished and the eggs laid therein, the goose took her place upon the collection, and the gander mounted guard.
There were so many hostiles on the warpath that he was kept on the qui vive during all daylight hours.
At a radius of about twenty feet he drew an imaginary dead-line around the family nest, and no bird, beast or man could pass that line without a fight.
If any other goose, or a swan or duck, attempted to pass, the guardian gander would rush forward with blazing eyes, open beak, wings open for action, and with distended neck hiss out his challenge.
If the intruder failed to register respect, and came on, the gander would seize the offender with his beak, and furiously wing-beat him into flight.
That gander was afraid of nothing, and his courage and readiness to fight all comers, all day long, caused visitors to accord him full recognition as a belligerent power.
THE CASE OF THE LAUGHING GULL.
About that same time, a pair of laughing gulls had the temerity to build a nest on the ground in the very storm centre of the great Flying Cage.
Daily and hourly they were surrounded by a truculent mob of pelicans, herons, ibises, storks, egrets and ducks, the most of whom delighted in wrecking households.
The keepers sided with the gulls by throwing around their nest a wire entanglement, with a sally-port at one side for the use of the beleaguered pair.
The voice of an angry or frightened laughing gull is it [sic] owner's chief defense.
The female sat on her nest and shrieked out her shrill and defiant war cry of "Kah!
kah, kah, kah!"
The male took post just outside the sally-port, where he postured and screamed and threatened until we wondered why he did not burst with superheated emotion.
I am sure that never before did two small gulls ever raise so much racket in so short a time and their cage-mates must have found it rather trying.
The gulls hatched their eggs, they reared their young successfully, and at last peace was restored.
A Mother Antelope Fights Off an Eagle.
Mr. Howard Eaton, of Wolf, Wyoming, once saw a female prong-horned antelope put up a strong and successful fight in defense of her newly-born fawn.
A golden eagle, whose spring specialty is for fawns, kids and lambs, was seen to swoop swiftly down toward a solitary antelope that had been noticed on a treeless range beside the Little Missouri.
It quickly became evident that the eagle was after an antelope fawn.
As the bird swooped down toward the mother, and endeavored to seize her fawn in its talons, the doe rose high on her hind legs, and with her forelegs flying like flails struck with her sharp- pointed hoofs again and again.
Her blows went home, and feathers were seen to fly from the body of the marauder.
The doe made good her defense.
The eagle was glad to escape, and as quickly as possible pulled himself together and flew away.
The Defensive Circle of the Musk-Ox.
Several arctic explorers have described the wonderful living-ring defense, previously mentioned, of musk-ox herds against wolves.
Mr. Paul Rainey's moving pictures have shown it to us in thrilling detail, with Eskimo dogs instead of wolves.
When a musk-ox herd is attacked by the big and deadly arctic white wolves, the bulls and adult cows herd the calves and young stock into a compact group, then take their places shoulder to shoulder around them in a perfect circle, and with lowered heads await the onset.
The sharp down-and-up curved horn of the musk-ox is a deadly weapon against all the dangerous animals of the North, except man.
When a wolf approaches near and endeavors to make a breach in the circle, the musk-ox nearest him tries to get him, and will even rush out of the line for a short and brief pursuit.
But the bull does not pursue more than twenty yards or so, for fear of being surrounded alone and cut off.
At the end of his usually futile run, back he goes and carefully backs into his place in the first line of defense.
A charging bull does not rush out far enough that the wolves can cut him off and kill him.
He is much too wise for that.
Mr. Stefansson says that the impregnability of the musk-ox defense is so well recognized by the wolves of the North that often a pack will march past a herd in close proximity without offering to attack it, and without even troubling the herd to form the hollow circle.
A Savage Wild Boar.
I once had a "fight" with a captive Japanese wild boar, under conditions both absurd and tragic, and from it I learned the courage and fury of such animals.
The animal was large, powerful, fearfully savage toward every living thing, and insanely courageous.
It was confined in a yard enclosed by a strong wire fence, and while we were all very sure that the fence would hold it, I became uneasy.
In mid-afternoon I went alone to the spot, passing hundreds of school children on the way, to study the situation.
When I reached the front of the corral and stood still to look at the fence, the boar immediately rushed for me.
He came straight on, angry and terrible, and charged the wire like a living battering-ram.
He repeated these charges until I became fearful of an outbreak, and decided to try to make him afraid to repeat them.
Procuring from the bear dens, a pike pole with a stout spike in the end, I received the next charge with a return thrust meant to puncture both the boar's hide and his understanding.
He backed off and charged more furiously than ever, with white foam flying from his jaws.
He cared nothing for his punishment.
He charged until his snout bled freely, and the fence bulged at the strain.
Then I became regularly scared!
I feared that the savage beast would break through the fence in spite of its strength, and run amuck among those helpless children.
I "beat it" back to my office, hurried back with one of my loaded rifles, and without losing a second put a bullet through that raging brain and ended that danger forever.
The Overrated Peccary.
This reminds me that the collared peccary has been credited with a degree of courage that has been much exaggerated.
While a hunted and cornered peccary will fight dogs or men, and put up a savage and dangerous defense, men whom I know in the peccary belt of Mexico have assured me that a drove of peccaries will _not_ attack a hunter who has killed one of their mates, nor keep him up a tree for hours while they swarm underneath him waiting for his blood.
I have been assured by competent witnesses that in peccary hunting there is no danger whatever of mass attack through a desire for revenge, and that peccaries fired at will run like deer.
A Black Bear Killed a Man for Food.
There is on record at least one well-authenticated case of a black bear deliberately going out of his way to cross a river, attack a man and kill him.
On May 17, 1907, at a lumber camp of the Red Deer Lumber Company, thirty miles south of Etiomami on the Canadian Northern Railway, Northwest Territory, a cook named T. Wilson was chased by a large black bear, without provocation, struck once on the head, and instantly killed.
The bear then picked him up, carried him a short distance, and proceeded to _eat_ him.
Ten shots from a .32 calibre revolver had no effect.
Later a rifle ball drove the bear away, but only after it had eaten the left thigh and part of the body.
(Forest and Stream, Feb. 8, 1908.)
The Status of the Gray Wolf.
In America wolves rarely succeed in killing men, although they often follow men's trails in the hope of spoil of some kind.
But there are exceptions.
In 1912, around Lake Nipigon, Province of Ontario, Canada, there existed a reign of terror from wolves.
The first man killed was a half-breed mail-carrier.
Then, in December, another mail-carrier, who was working the lumber camps north of Lake Nipigon, was killed by wolves and completely devoured.
The snow showed a terrible struggle, in which four large wolves had been killed by the carrier.
In Russia and in France in the days preceding the use of modern breech-loading firearms, the gray wolves of Europe were very bold, and a great many people were killed by them.
Killings by Wild Beasts in India.
The killing by wild beasts of unarmed and defenseless native men, women and children in India is a very different matter from man-killing in resourceful and dangerous North America.
The annual slaughter by wild beasts in Hindustan and British Burma is a fairly good index of the courage and aggressiveness of the parties of the first part.
In India during the year 1878, in which we were specially interested, the totals were as follows: Persons killed by elephants, 33; tigers, 816; leopards, 300; bears, 94; wolves, 845; hyenas, 33; snakes, 16,812.
Of course such slaughter as this by the ridiculous hyenas and the absurd sloth bears of India is possible only in a country wherein the swarming millions of people are universally defenseless, and children are superabundant.
As a corollary to the above figures, a comparison of them with the roster of wild animals killed and paid for is of some interest.
The dangerous beasts destroyed were as follows: Elephants, 1; tigers, 1,493; leopards, 3,387; bears, 1,283; wolves, 5,067; hyenas, 1,202; serpents, 117,782.
The Fighting Spirit in Baboons.
In the first analysis, we find that courage is an individual trait, and that so far as we know, it never characterizes all the individuals of any one species.
The strongest and the best armed of men and beasts usually are accounted the bravest ones of earth.
The defenseless ones do well to be timid, to avoid hostilities and to flee from conflict to avoid being destroyed.
It is just as much the duty of a professional mother to flee and to hide, in order to save her own life, as it is for "the old he-one" to threaten and to fight.
At the same time, there are many species which are concededly courageous, as species.
In making up this list I would place first of all the baboons of eastern Africa, whom I regard collectively as the most bold and reckless fighters per pound avoirdupois to be found in the whole Order Primates.
They have weapons, agility, strength and cyclonic courage.
On no other basis could they have so long survived _on land_ in a country full of lions, leopards, cheetahs, hyenas and wild dogs.
In order to appreciate the fighting spirit of a male baboon, the observer need only come just once in actual touch with one.
A dozen times I have been seized by a powerful baboon hand shot out with lightning quickness between or under his cage bars.
The combined strength and ferocity of the grab, and the grip on the human hand or arm, is unbelievable until felt, and this with an accompaniment of glaring eyes, snarling lips and nerve-ripping voice is quite sufficient to intimidate any ordinary man.
But even in the courage and belligerency of baboons, there are some marked differences between species.
I rank them as follows: The most fierce and dangerous species is the East African baboon.
The next for courage is the Rhodesian species.
The spectacular hamadryas baboon is a very good citizen.
The long-armed yellow species makes very little trouble, and The small golden baboon is the best-behaved of them all.
Courage in the Great Apes.
After forty years of ape study, with many kinds of evidence, I am convinced that the courage and the alleged ferocity of the gorilla has been much over-rated.
I believe this is due to the influence upon the human mind of the great size and terrifying aspect of the animal.
Of all the men whom I have known or read, the late R. L. Garner knew by far the most of gorilla habits and character by personal observation in the gorilla jungles of equatorial Africa.
And never, in several years of intimate contact with Mr, Garner did he so much as once put forth a statement or an estimate that seemed to me exaggerated or overcolored.
In our many discussions of gorilla character Mr. Garner always represented that animal as very shy, wary of observation by man, profoundly cunning in raiding _in darkness_ the banana plantations of man's villages, and most carefully avoiding exposures by daylight.
He described the gorilla as practically never attacking men unless first attacked by them, and fleeing unless forcibly brought to bay.
He told me of are doubtable African tribesman who once captured a baby gorilla on the ground by suddenly attacking the mother with his club and beating her so successfully that she fled from him and abandoned her young.
"But," said Mr. Garner, "there is only one tribe in Africa that could turn out a man who would attempt a feat like that."
That the gorilla can and will fight furiously and effectively when brought to bay is well known, and never denied.
Of the apes I have known in captivity, the chimpanzees are by far the most aggressive, courageous and dangerous.
A vigorous male specimen over eight years of age is more dangerous than a lion, or tiger, or grizzly bear, and _far more anxious_ to fight something.
I think that even if our Boma were muzzled, no five men of my acquaintance could catch him and tie his hands and feet.
The orang-utan is only half the fighter that the chimpanzee is.
Even the adult males are not persistently aggressive, or inflamed by savage desires to hurt somebody.
Courage in Elephants as an Asset.
In all portions of India wherein tiger hunting with elephants is practiced, elephants with good courage are at a premium.
No elephant is fit to carry a howdah in a line of beaters, with a valuable sahib on board, unless its courage can stand the acid test of a wounded tiger's charge.
When an elephant can endure without panic an infuriated tiger climbing up its frontispiece to get at the unhappy mahout and the hunter, that elephant belongs in the courageous class.
The cowardly elephant screams in terror, bolts for the rear, and if there is a tree in the landscape promptly wrecks the howdah and the sportsman against its lower branches.
A "rogue" elephant always reminds me of my Barbados boatman's description of a pugnacious friend: "De trouble is, he am too brave!"
A rogue elephant will attack anything from a wheelbarrow to a hut, and destroy it.
The peak of rogue ambition was reached on a railway in Burma, near Ban Klap, in March 1908, when a rogue elephant "on hearing the locomotive whistle, trumpeted loudly and then, lowering his head, charged the oncoming train.
The impact was tremendous.
Such was the impetus of the great pachyderm that the engine was partially derailed, the front of the smoke-box shattered as far as the tubes, the cow-catcher was crushed into a shapeless piece of iron, and other damages of minor importance were sustained.
The train was going thirty-four miles per hour, and the engine alone weighed between forty and fifty tons.
"Of course the elephant was killed by the shock, its head being completely smashed....
It is believed that this particular rogue had been responsible for considerable damage to villages in the vicinity of Lopbusi.
A number of houses have been pulled down recently and havoc wrought in other ways."
On another occasion a vicious rogue elephant elected to try conclusions with a railway train.
In 1906, on the Korat branch of the Siamese State Railway, a bull elephant attacked a freight train running at full speed.
He charged the rushing locomotive, with the result that the locomotive and several cars were derailed and sent down the side of the grade, and two persons were killed.
The elephant was killed outright and buried under the wreck of the train.
This occurred in open country, where there was no excuse for an elephant on the track, and therefore the charge of the rogue was wholly gratuitous.
Captive elephants whose managers are too humane to punish them for manifestations of meanness become spoiled by their immunity, just as mean children are spoiled when fond and foolish parents feel that their little jackets are too sacred ever to be tanned.
Such complete immunity is as bad for bad elephants as for bad children, but in practice the severe punishment of an elephant with real benefit to the animal is next door to an impossibility, and so we never attempt it.
We do, however, inflict mild punishments, of the fourth order of efficiency.
Animals and Men.
Among the animals that are most courageous against man are the species and individuals that are most familiar with him, and feel for him both contempt and hatred.
The cat scratches, the bad dog bites, the vicious horse kicks or bites, and the mean pet bear, tiger, ape, leopard, bison or deer will attempt injury or murder whenever they think the chance has arrived.
I know a lady whose pet monkey is a savage and mean little beast, and because she never thrashes it as it deserves, both of her arms from wrist to elbow have been scarified by its teeth.
Mr. E. R. Sanborn, official photographer of the Zoological Park, once made an ingenious and also terrifying experiment.
He made an excellent dummy keeper, stood it up, and tied it fast against the fence inside the yard of our very large and savage male Grevy Zebra.
Then he posed his moving picture camera in a safe place, and the keeper turned the zebra into the yard.
The moment the bad zebra caught sight of the presumptive keeper,--at last within his power,--he rushed at the dummy with glaring eyes and open mouth, and seized his victim by the head.
With furious efforts he tore the dummy loose from its moorings, whirled it into the middle of the yard, where in a towering rage he knelt upon it, bit and tore its heart out.
Of course the unfortunate dummy perished.
The zebra reveled in his triumph, and altogether it was a fearsome sight.
CAUTION.
A thoroughly cowardly horse _never_ should be ridden, nor driven to anything so light that a runaway is possible.
Such animals are too expensive both to human life and to property.
A dangerous horse can be just as great a risk as a bad lion or bear.
IV.--THE BASER PASSIONS XXII FEAR AS A RULING PASSION If we were asked, "Which one may be called the ruling passion of the wild animal?"
we would without hesitation answer,--it is fear.
From the cradle to the grave, every strictly wild animal lives, day and night, in a state of fear of bodily harm, and dread of hunger and famine.
"Now the 'free, wild life' is a round of strife, And of ceaseless hunger and fear; And the life in the wild of the animal child Is not all skittles and beer."
The first thing that the wild baby learns, both by precept and example, is safety first!
When the squalling and toddling bear cub first goes abroad, the mother bear is worried and nervous for fear that in a sudden and dangerous emergency the half-helpless little one will not be able to make a successful get-away when the alarm- signal snort is given.
During the first, and most dangerous, days in the life of the elk, deer and antelope fawn, the first care of the mother is to hide her offspring in a spot cunningly chosen beside a rock, beside a log, or in thick bushes.
In the absence of all those she looks for a depression in the earth wherein the fawn can lie without making a hump in the landscape.
The first impulse of the fawn,--even before nursing if the birth occurs in daylight,--is to fold its long legs, short body and reptilian neck into a very small package, hug the earth tightly, close its eyes and lie absolutely motionless until its mother gives the signal to arise and sup.
Such infants may lie for long and weary hours without so much as moving an ear; and the anxious mother strolls away to some distance to avoid disclosing her helpless offspring.
Now, suppose you discover and touch an elk or a deer fawn while thus hiding.
What will it do?
Nine times out of ten it will bound up as if propelled by steel springs, and go off like an arrow from a bow, dashing in any direction that is open and leads straight away.
The horrified mother will rush into view in dangerously near proximity, and I have seen a wild white-tailed deer doe tear madly up and down in full view and near by, to attract the danger to herself.
Thousands of men and boys have seen a mother quail flop and flutter and play wounded, to lead the dangerous boy away from her brood of little quail mites, and work the ruse so daringly and successfully as to save both her babies and herself.
I well remember my surprise and admiration when a mother quail first played that trick upon me.
I expected to pick her up,--and forgot all about the chicks,--until they were every one safely in hiding, and then Mrs. Quail gave me the laugh and flew away.
Was it strategy?
Was it the result of quail thought and reason?
Or did it come by heredity, just like walking?
To deny the cold facts in the quail case is to discredit our own ability to reason and be honest.
Fear is the ruling emotion alike of the most timid creatures, and also the boldest.
Of course each wild animal keeps a mental list of the other animals of which he is not afraid; and the predatory animal also keeps a card catalogue of those which he may safely attack when in need of food.
But, with all due consideration to mighty forearm, to deadly claws and stabbing fangs, there is (I think) absolutely no land animal that is not afraid of something.
Let us progressively consider a few famous species near at hand.
The savage and merciless weasel fears the fox, the skunk, the wolf and the owl.
The skunk fears the coyote which joyously kills him and devours all of him save his jaws and his tail.
The marten, mink and fisher have mighty good reason to fear the wolverine, who in his turn cheerfully gives the road to the gray wolf.
The wolf and the lynx carefully avoid the mountain lion and the black bear, and the black bear is careful not to get too close to a grizzly.
Today a cotton-tail rabbit is not more afraid of a hound than a grizzly bear is of a man.
The polar bear once was bold in the presence of man; but somebody has told him about breech-loading high power rifles; and now he, too, runs in terror from every man that he sees.
The lion, the tiger, the leopard and the jaguar all live in wholesome fear of man, and flee from him at sight.
The lordly elephant does likewise, and so does the rhinoceros, save when he is in doubt about the identity of the biped animal and trots up to get certainty out of a nearer view.
Col. Roosevelt became convinced, that most of the alleged "charging" of rhinoceroses was due to curiosity and poor vision, and the desire of rhinos to investigate at close range.
Today the giant brown bears of Alaska exhibit less fear of man than any other land animals that we know, and many individuals have put themselves on record as dangerous fighters.
And this opens the door to the great Alaskan controversy that for a year raged,--chiefly upon one side,--in certain Alaskan newspapers and letters.
Early in 1920, certain parties in Alaska publicly asked people to believe that W. T. Hornaday in his "published works" had set up the Alaskan brown bear as "a harmless animal."
All these statements and insinuations were notoriously false, but the repetition of them went on right merrily, even while the author's article portraying the savage and dangerous character of the brown bear was being widely circulated in the United States through _Boys' Life_ magazine.
The indisputable facts regarding the temper of the great Alaskan brown bears are as follows: Usually, unless fired at, these big brown bears flee from man at sight of him, and by many experienced Alaskan bear hunters who can shoot they are not regarded as particularly dangerous, save when they are attacked by man, or think that they are to be attacked.
They are just now the boldest of all bears, and the most dangerous.
They often attack men who are hunting them, and have killed several.
They have attacked a few persons who were not hunting.
Where they are really numerous they are a menace and a nuisance to frontiersmen who need to traverse their haunts.
In all places where Alaskan brown bears are quite too numerous for public safety, their numbers should thoroughly be reduced; and everywhere the bears of Alaska should be pursued and shot until the survivors acquire the wholesome respect for man that now is felt everywhere by the polar and the grizzly.
Then the Alaskans will have peace, and our Alaskan enemies possibly will cease to try to discredit our intelligence.
The most impressive exhibition of wild-animal fear that Americans ever have seen was furnished by the African motion pictures of Paul J. Rainey.
They were taken from a blind constructed within close range of a dry river bed in northern British East Africa, where a supply of water was held, by a stratum of waterproof clay or rock, about four feet below the surface of the dry river bed.
By industrious pawing the zebras had dug a hole down to the water, and to this one life-saving well wild animals of many species flocked from miles around.
The camera faithfully recorded the doings of elephants, giraffes, zebras, hartebeests, gnus, antelopes of several species, wart-hogs and baboons.
The personnel of the daily assemblage was fairly astounding, and to a certain extent the observer of those wonderful pictures can from them read many of the thoughts of the animals.
Next to the plainly expressed desire to quench their thirst, the dominant thought in the minds of those animals, one and all, was the _fear of being attacked._ In some species this ever- present and harassing dread was a pitiful spectacle.
I wish it might be witnessed by all those ultra-humane persons who think and say that the free wild animals are the only happy ones!
With the possible exception of the sanguine-tempered elephants, all those animals were afraid of being seized or attacked while drinking.
One and all did the same thing.
An animal would approach the water-hole, nervously looking about for enemies.
The fore feet cautiously stepped down, the head disappeared to reach the water, --but quickly shot upward again, to look for the enemies.
It was alternately drink, look, drink, look, for a dozen quick repetitions, then a scurry for safety.
Even the stilt-legged and long-necked giraffes went through that same process,--a mouthful of water greedily seized, and a fling of the head upward to stare about for danger.
Group by group the animals of each species took their turns.
The baboons drifted down over the steep rocky slope like a flock of skimming birds, and watched and drank by turn.
Having finished, they paused not for idle gossip or play, but as swiftly as they came drifted up the slope and sought safety elsewhere.
And yet, it was noticeable that during the whole of that astounding panorama of ferae naturae unalloyed by man's baleful influence, no species attacked another, there was no fighting, nor even any threatening of any kind.
Had there been a white flag waving over that water-hole, the truce of the wild could not have been more perfect.
Effect of Fear in Captive Animals.
Among captive wild animals, by far the most troublesome are those that are obsessed by slavish fear of being harmed.
The courageous and supremely confident grizzly or Alaskan brown bear is in his den a good-natured and reliable animal, who obeys orders when the keepers enter the den to do the daily housework and order him to "Get up out of here."
The fear-possessed Japanese black bear, Malay sun bear and Indian sloth bear are the ones that are most dangerous, and that sometimes charge the keepers.
Our famous "picture lion," Sultan, was serenely confident of his own powers, his nerves were steady and reliable, and he never cared to attack man or beast.
Once when by the error of a fellow keeper the wrong chain was pulled, and the wrong partition door was opened, the working keeper bent his head, and broom in hand walked into what he thought was an empty cage.
To his horror, he found himself face to face with Sultan, with only the length of the broom handle between them.
The startled and helpless keeper stood still, and said in a calm voice, without batting an eye.
"Hello, Sultan."
Sultan calmly looked at him, wonderingly and inquiringly, but without even a trace of excitement; and feeling sure that the keeper did not mean to harm him, he seemed to have no thought of attacking.
The keeper quietly backed through the low doorway, and gently closed the door.
Had the keeper lost his nerve, _and shown it,_ there might have been a tragedy.
Lions are the best of all carnivorous performing animals, because of their courage, serenity, self-confidence and absence of jumpy nerves.
Leopards are the worst, and polar bears stand next, with big chimpanzees as a sure third.
Beware of all three.
Exceptions to the Rule of Fear.
Fortunately for the wild animal world, there are some exceptions to the rule of fear.
I will indicate the kinds of them, and students can supply the individual cases.
Whenever a wild animal species inhabits a spot so remote and inaccessible that man's blighting hand never has fallen upon it, nor in any way influenced its life or its fortunes, that species knows no fear save from the warring elements, and from predatory animals.
The wonderful giant penguins found and photographed near the south pole by Sir Ernest Shackleton never had seen nor heard of men, never had been attacked by predatory animals or birds.
You may search this wide world over, and you will not find a more striking example of sublime isolation.
Those penguins had been living in a penguin's paradise.
The sea-leopard seals harmed them not, and until the arrival of the irrepressible British explorer the spell  of that antarctic elysium was unbroken.
[Illustration with caption: PRIMITIVE PENGUINS ON THE ANTARCTIC CONTINENT, UNAFRAID OF MAN (From Sir Ernest Shackleton's "Heart of the Antarctic," by permission of William Heinemann and the J.
B. Lippincott Company, publishers)] Those astounding birds knew no such emotion as fear.
Under the impulse of the icy waves dashing straight up to the edge of the ice floes, those giant penguins shot out of the water, sped like catapulted birds curving through the air, and landed on their cushioned breasts high and dry, fully ten feet back from the edge of the floe.
They flocked together, they waddled about erect and serene, heads high in air, and marched close up to the ice-bound ship to see what it was all about.
Men and horses freely walked among them without exciting fear, and when the birds gathered in a vast assemblage the naturalists and photographers were welcomed everywhere.
And indeed those birds were well-nigh the most fortunate birds in all the world.
The men who found them were not low-browed butchers thinking only of "oil" or "fertilizer"; and they did not go to work at once to club all those helpless birds into masses of death and corruption.
Those men wondered at them, laughed at them, photographed them, studied them,--and _left them in peace!_ What a thundering contrast that was with the usual course of Man, the bloody savage, under such circumstances!
The coast of Lower California once swarmed with seals, sea-lions and birds, and the waters of the Gulf were alive with whales.
Now the Gulf and the shores of the Peninsula are as barren of wild life as Death Valley.
The history of the whaling industry contains many sickening records of the wholesale slaughter by savage whalers of newly discovered herds of walrus, seals and sea birds that through isolation knew no fear, and were easily clubbed to death en masse.
Wild creatures generally subscribe to the political principle that in union there is strength.
In the minds of wild animals, birds and reptiles, great numbers of individuals massed together make for general security from predatory attacks.
The herd with its many eyes and ears feels far greater security, and less harrowing fear, than the solitary individual who must depend upon his own two pair.
The herd members relax and enjoy life; but the solitary bear, deer, sheep, goat or elephant does not.
His nerves always are strung up to concert pitch, and while he feeds or drinks, or travels, he watches his step.
A moving object, a strange-looking object, a strange sound or a queer scent in the air instantly fixes his attention, and demands analysis.
On the North American continent the paramount fear of the wild animal is aroused to its highest pitch by what is called "man scent."
And really, from the Battery to the North Pole, there is good reason for this feeling of terror, and high wisdom in fleeing fast and far.
Said a wise old Ojibway Indian to Arthur Heming: "My son, when I smell some men, and especially some white men, I never blame the animals of the Strong Woods for taking fright and running away!"
And civilization also has its terrors, as much as the wilderness.
The fox, no matter what is the color of his coat, or his given name, is the incarnation of timidity and hourly fear.
The nocturnal animals go abroad and work at night solely because they are afraid to work in the daytime.
The beaver will cheerfully work in daytime if there is no prospect of observation or interference by man.
The eagle builds in the top of the tallest tree, and the California condor high up on the precipitous side of a frightful canyon wall, because they are afraid of the things on the ground below.
In the great and beautiful Animallai Forest (of Southern India), in 1877 the tiger walked abroad in the daytime, because men were few and weak, but in the populous and dangerous plains he did his traveling and killing at night, and lay closely hidden by day.
Judging by the records of those who have hunted lions, I think that naturally the lion has more courage and less fear of bodily harm than any other wild animal of equal intelligence.
By reason of his courage and self-confidence, as well as his majesty of physique, the lion is indeed well worthy to be called the King of Beasts.
Among the few animals that seem naturally bold and ready to take risks, a notable species is the gray wolf.
But is it really free from fear?
Far from it.
When in touch with civilization, from dawn until dark the wolf never forgets to look out for his own safety.
He fears man, he fears the claws of every bear, he fears traps, poison and the sharp horns of the musk-ox.
Individually the wolf is a contemptible coward.
Rarely does he attack all alone an animal of his own size, unless it is a defenseless colt, calf or sheep.
No animal is more safe from another than an able-bodied bull from the largest wolf.
The wolf believes in mass action, not in single combat.
But there is hope for the harassed and nerve-racked children of the wild.
_The Game Sanctuary has come!_ Its area of safety, and its magic boundary, are quickly recognized by the harried deer, elk, sheep, goat and antelope, and right quickly do these and all other wild animals set up housekeeping on a basis of absolute safety.
Talk about wild animals not "reasoning!"
For shame.
What else than REASON convinced the wild mountain sheep in the rocky fastnesses they once inhabited in terror that now they are SAFE, even in the streets of Ouray, and that "Ouray" rhymes with "your hay"?
On account of his crimes against wild life, man (both civilized and savage) has much to answer for; but each wild life sanctuary that he now creates wipes out one chapter.
From the Cape to Cairo, from the Aru Islands to Tasmania and from Banks Land to the Mexican boundary, they are growing and spreading.
In them, save for the misdoings of the few uncaught and unkilled predatory animals, fear can die out, and the peace of paradise regained take its place.
HYSTERIA OF FEAR IN A BEAR.
Among wild animals in captivity hysteria, of the type produced by fear, is fairly common.
A case noticed particularly on October 16, 1909, in a young female Kadiak bear, may well be cited as an example.
The subject was then about two and one-half years old, and was caged in a large open den with four other bears of the same age.
Of a European brown bear male, only a trifle larger than herself, she elected to be terror-stricken, as much so as ever a human child was in terror of every move of a brutal adult tormentor.
Strangely enough, the cause of all this terror was wholly unconscious of it, and in the course of an observation lasting at least twenty minutes he made not one hostile movement.
The greater portion of the time he idly moved about in the central space of the den, wholly oblivious of the alarm he was causing.
The young Kadiak, in full flesh and vigor, first attracted my attention by her angry and terrified snorting, three quick snorts to the series.
On the top of the rocks she raced to and fro, constantly eyeing the bear in the centre of the den.
If he moved toward the rocks, she wildly plunged down, snorting and glaring, and raced to the front end of the den.
If the bogey stopped to lick up a fallen leaf, she took it as a hostile act and wildly rushed past him and scrambled up the rocks at the farther end of the den.
This was repeated about fifteen times in twenty minutes, accompanied by a continuous series of terrified snorts.
She panted from exhaustion, frothed at the mouth, and acted like an animal half crazed by terror.
Not once, however, did the bogey bear pay the slightest attention to her, and his sleepy manner was anything but terrifying.
These spells of hysteria (without real cause) at last became so frequent that they seemed likely to injure the growth of a valuable animal, and finally the bogey bear was removed to another den.
XXIII FIGHTING AMONG WILD ANIMALS Quarrels and combats between wild animals in a state of nature are almost invariably due to one of two causes--attack and defense in a struggle for prey, or the jealousy of males during the mating season.
With rare exceptions, battles of the former class occur between animals of different Orders,--teeth and claws against horns and hoofs, for instance; and it is a fight to the death.
Hunger forces the aggressor to attack something, and the intended victim fights because it is attacked.
The question of good or ill temper does not enter in.
On both sides it is a case of "must," and neither party has any option.
Such combats are tests of agility, strength, and staying powers, and, in a few cases, of thickness of bone and hide.
How Orang-Utans Fight.
Of the comparatively few animals which do draw blood of their own kind through ill temper or jealousy, I have never encountered any more given to internecine strife than orang-utans.
Their fighting methods, and their love of fighting, are highly suggestive of the temper and actions of the human tough.
They fight by biting, and usually it is the fingers and toes that suffer.
Of twenty-seven orang-utans I shot in Borneo, and twelve more that were shot for me by native hunters, five were fighters, and had had one or more fingers or toes bitten off in battle.
Those specimens were taken in the days when the museums of America were one and all destitute of anthropoid apes.
A gorilla, chimpanzee, or orang-utan, being heavy of body, short of neck, and by no means nimble footed, cannot spring upon an adversary, choose a vulnerable spot, and bite to kill; but what it lacks in agility it makes up in length and strength of arm and hand.
It seizes its antagonist's hand, carries it to its own mouth, and bites at the fingers.
Usually, the bitten finger is severed as evenly as by a surgeon's amputation, and heals quite as successfully.
I never saw two big orang-utans fighting, but I have had several captive ones seize my arm and try to bring my fingers within biting distance.
The canine teeth of a full grown male orang, standing four feet four inches in height, and weighing a hundred and fifty pounds or more, are just as large and dangerous as the teeth of a bear of the same size, and the powerful incisors have one quality which the teeth of a bear do not possess.
A bear pierces or tears an antagonist with his canines, but very rarely bites off anything.
An orang-utan bites off a finger as evenly as a boy nips off the end of a stick of candy.
When orang-utans fight, they also attack each other's faces, and often their broad and expansive lips suffer severely.
My eleventh orang bore the scars of many a fierce duel in the tree-tops.
A piece had been bitten out of the middle of both his lips, leaving in each a large, ragged notch.
Both his middle fingers had been taken off at the second joint, and his feet had lost the third right toe, the fourth left toe, and the end of one hallux.
His back, also, had sustained a severe injury, which had retarded his growth.
This animal we called "The Desperado."
Orang No.
34 had lost the entire edge of his upper lip.
It had been bitten across diagonally, but adhered at one corner, and healed without sloughing off, so that during the last years of his life a piece of lip two inches long hung dangling at the corner of his mouth.
He had also suffered the loss of an entire finger.
No.
36 had lost a good sized piece out of his upper lip, and the first toe had been bitten off his left foot.
All these combats must have taken place in the tree-tops, for an adult orang-utan has never been known to descend to the earth except for water.
In some manner it has become a prevalent belief that in their native jungles all three of the great apes-- gorilla, orang, and chimpanzee--are dangerous to human beings, and often attack them with clubs.
Nothing could be farther from the truth.
According to the natives of West Africa, a gorilla or chimpanzee fights a hunter by biting his face and fingers, just as an orang-utan does.
I believe that no sane orang ever voluntarily left the safety of a tree top to fight at a serious disadvantage on the ground; and I am sure an orang never struck a blow with a club, unless carefully taught to do so.
WILD ANIMALS ARE NOT QUARRELSOME.
As a species, man appears to be the most quarrelsome animal on the earth; and the same quality is strongly reflected in his most impressionable servant and companion, the domestic dog.
Nearly all species of wild animals have learned the two foundation facts of the philosophy of life-- that peace is better than war, and that if one must fight, it is better to fight outside one's own species.
To this rule, however, wolves are a notable exception; for wherever wolves are abundant a wounded wolf is a subject for attack, and usually it is killed and eaten by the other members of the pack.
I have observed the daily habits of many kinds of wild animals in their wild haunts, but in the field I never yet have seen either a fight between animals of the same species, or between two of different species.
This may seem a very humiliating admission for a hunter to make, but it happens to be true.
In the matter of finding big snakes, having exciting adventures, and witnessing combats between wild animals, there are some men who never are in luck.
Now there was the "Old Shekarry,"--whose elephants, tigers, bison, bears, and sambar always were so much larger than mine.
In his book, "Sport in Many Lands," he describes an affair of honor between a tiger and a bull bison, which was a truly ideal combat.
The champions met by appointment,--by the light of the moon, in order to be safe from interference by the jungle police,--and they fought round after round, in the most orthodox prize ring style, under the Queensberry rules.
So fairly did they fight that neither claimed a foul, and at the finish the two combatants retired to their respective corners and died simultaneously, "to the musical twitter of the night bird."
Another writer has given a vivid description of a battle to the death between a wild bull and a grizzly bear; and we have read of several awful combats between black bears and alligators, in Florida; but some of us have yet to find either a black bear or an alligator that will stop to fight when he has an option on a line of retreat.
When he has lived long,--say to the length of twelve feet,--the alligator is a hideous and terrorizing beast; but, for all that, he knows a thing or two; and a full grown, healthy black bear of active habit is about the last creature on earth that a 'gator would care to meddle with.
Pigs and calves, fawns, stray dogs, ducks and mud hens are antagonists more to his liking.
The Fighting Tactics of Bears.
In captivity, bears quarrel and scold one another freely, at feeding time, but seldom draw blood.
I have questioned many old hunters, and read many books by bear hunters, but Ira Dodge, of Wyoming, is the only man I know who has witnessed a real fight between wild bears.
He once saw a battle between a cinnamon and a grizzly over the carcass of an elk.
In attacking, a bear does three things, and usually in the same order.
First, he delivers a sweeping sidewise blow on the head of his antagonist; then he seizes him by the cheek, with the intention of shifting to the throat as quickly as it is safe to do so.
His third move consists in throwing his weight upon his foe and bearing him to the earth, where he will have a better chance at his throat.
If the fighters are fairly matched, the struggle is head to head and mouth to mouth.
After the first onset, the paws do little or no damage, and the attacks of the teeth rarely go as far down as the shoulders.
Often the assailant will seize his opponent's cheek and hold on so firmly that for a full minute the other can do nothing; but this means little.
In combats between bears, the one that is getting mauled, or that feels outclassed, will throw himself upon the ground, flat upon his back, and proceed to fight with all four sets of claws in addition to his teeth.
This attitude is purely defensive, and often is maintained until an opportunity occurs to attack with good advantage, or to escape.
It is very difficult for a standing bear to make a serious impression upon an antagonist who lies upon his back, clawing vigorously with all four feet at the head of his assailant.
Tiger Versus Grizzly Bear.
Often is the question asked, "If a grizzly bear and a tiger should fight, which would whip the other?"
One can answer only with opinions and deductions, not by reference to the records of the ring; for it seems that the terrors of the occident and the orient have never yet been matched in a fight to a finish.
One of the heaviest tigers ever weighed, prior to 1878, scaled four hundred and ninety five pounds, and was as free from surplus flesh and fat as a prizefighter in the ring.
He stood three feet seven inches at the shoulder, measured thirty-six inches around the jaws, and twenty inches around the forearm.
Very few lions have ever exceeded his weight or dimensions.
So far as I know, a wild grizzly bear of the largest size has never been scaled, but it is not at all certain that any California grizzly has weighed more than twelve hundred pounds.
The silvertip of the Rocky Mountain region is a totally different animal, being smaller, as well as different in color.
In a match between a grizzly and a tiger of equal weights, the activity of the latter, combined with the greater spread of his jaws and length of his canine teeth, would insure him the victory.
The superior attack of the tiger would give him an advantage which it would probably be impossible to overcome.
The blow of a tiger's paw is as powerful as that of a grizzly of the same size, though I doubt if it is any quicker in delivery.
The quickness with which a seemingly clumsy bear can deliver a smashing blow is astonishing.
Moreover, nature has given the grizzly a coat of fur which as a protection in fighting is almost equal to chain mail.
Its length, combined with its density, makes it difficult for teeth or claws to cut through it, and in a struggle with a tiger, protective fur is only a fair compensation for a serious lack of leaping power in the hinder limbs.
Though the tiger would win at equal weights, it is extremely probable that an adult California grizzly would vanquish a tiger of the largest size, for his greater bulk would far outweigh the latter's agility.
The Great Cats as Fighters.
Tigers, when well matched, fight head to head and mouth to mouth, as do nearly all other carnivora, and at the same time they strike with their front paws.
One of the finest spectacles I ever witnessed was a pitched battle between two splendid tigers, in a cage which afforded them ample room.
With loud, roaring coughs, they sprang together, ears laid tight to their heads, eyes closed until only sparks of green and yellow fire flashed through four narrow slits, and their upper lips snarling high up to clear the glittering fangs beneath.
Coughing, snarling, and often roaring furiously, each sprang for the other's throat, but jaw met jaw until their teeth almost cracked together.
They rose fully erect on their hind legs, with their heads seven feet high, stood there, and smashed away with their paws, while tufts of hair flew through the air, and the cage seemed full of sparks.
Neither gave the other a chance to get the throat hold, nor indeed to do aught else than ward off calamity; and each face was a picture of fury.
This startling combat lasted a surprisingly long time, without noticeable advantage to either side.
Finally the tigers backed away from each other, and when at a safe distance apart dropped their front feet to the floor, growling savagely and licking their lips wherever a claw had drawn blood.
Of all the wild animals that are preyed upon by lions, tigers, leopards, jaguars, and pumas, only half a dozen species do anything more than struggle to escape.
The gaur and the wild buffalo of India are sufficiently vindictive in dealing with a human hunter whose aim is not straight, but both fly before the tiger, and count themselves lucky when they can escape with nothing worse to show than a collection of long slits on their sides and hind quarters made by his knife-like claws.
They do not care to return to do battle for the sake of revenge, and seek to put the widest possible stretch of jungle between themselves and their dreaded enemy.
The same is true of the African buffalo and the lion.
As to the antelopes of Africa and the deer of India, what can they do but make a desperate effort to escape, and fly like the wind whenever they succeed?
Of course many of these defenseless animals make a gallant struggle for their lives, and not a few succeed in throwing off their assailants and escaping.
Even domestic cattle sometimes return to the hill country villages of southern India bearing claw marks on their sides--usually the work of young tigers, or of rheumatic old ones.
Here is a deer and puma story.
In the picturesque bad-lands of Hell Creek, Montana, I saw my comrade, Laton A. Huffman, kill a large mule deer buck that three months previously had been attacked by a puma.
From above it, the great cat had leaped upon the back of the deer, and laid hold with teeth and claws.
In its struggle for life the buck either leaped or fell off the edge of a perpendicular "cut bank," and landed upon its back, with the puma underneath.
Evidently the puma was so seriously injured that it could not continue the struggle; but it surely left its ear-marks.
One ear of the buck was fearfully torn.
There was a big wound on the top of the neck, where the puma jaws had lacerated the skin and flesh; and both hind legs had been badly clawed by the assailant's hind feet.
The main beam of the right antler had been, broken off half-way up, while the antlers were still in the velvet, which enabled us to fix the probable date of the encounter.
In the great Wynaad forest I once got lost, and in toiling through a five acre patch of grass higher than my head, and so dense that it was not negotiable except by following the game trails, my simple old Kuramber and I came suddenly upon the scene of a great struggle.
In the center of a space about twenty feet in diameter, on which the tall grass had been trampled flat, lay the remains of a sambar stag which had very recently been killed and eaten by a tiger.
The neck had not been dislocated, and the sambar had fought long and hard.
Evidently the tiger had lain in wait on the runway, and had failed to subdue the sambar by his first fierce onslaught.
Now an angry stag with good antlers is no mean antagonist, and it is strange if the tiger in the case went through that struggle without a puncture in his tawny skin.
In South Africa, Vaughan Kirby once found the dead bodies of a "patriarchal bull" sable antelope and a lion, "which had evidently been a fine specimen," lying close together, where the two animals had fallen after a great struggle.
The sable antelope must have killed its antagonist by a lucky backward thrust of its long, curved horns as the lion fastened upon its back to pull it down.
Mr. Kirby's dogs once disturbed a sanguinary struggle between a leopard and a wild boar, or "bush pig," which had well-nigh reached a finish.
The old boar, when bayed by the dogs, was found to be most terribly mauled.
Its tough skin hung literally in shreds from its neck and shoulders, presenting ghastly open wounds.
The entrails protruded from a deep claw gash in the side, and the head was a mass of blood and dirt.
"On searching around," says Mr. Kirby, "we found unmistakable evidence of a life and death struggle.
The ground was covered with gouts of blood and yellow hair, to some of which the skin (of the leopard) was still attached.
Blood was splashed plentifully on the tree stems and the low brushwood, which for a space of a dozen yards around was trampled flat."
The leopard had fled upon the approach of the dogs, leaving a trail of blood, which, though followed quickly, was finally lost in bad ground.
It is no wonder that from the above and many other evidences equally good, Mr. Kirby considers the bush pig a remarkably courageous animal.
He says that it was "never yet known to show the white feather," and declares that "a pig is never defeated until he is dead."
The Combats of Male Deer.
The sable antelope is one of the few exceptions to the well-nigh universal rule against fighting between wild animals of the same species.
Of this species, Mr. Kirby says: "Sable antelope bulls fight most fiercely amongst themselves, and though I have never actually witnessed an encounter between them, I have often seen the results of such, evidenced by great gaping wounds that could have been made by nothing else than the horns of an opponent.
I once killed a large bull with a piece of another's horn tip, fully three inches long, buried in its neck.
In 1889 I shot an old bull on the Swinya with a terrible wound in its off shoulder, caused by a horn thrust."
During the jealous flashes of the mating season, the males of several species of deer fight savagely.
After a long period of inaction while the new antlers are developing--from April to September--the beginning of October finds the male deer, elk, or moose of North America with a new suit of hair, new horns, a swollen neck, and all his usual assertiveness.
The crisp autumn air promotes a disposition to fight something, precisely as it inspires a sportsman to "kill something."
During October and November, particularly, it is well for an unarmed man to give every antlered deer a wide berth.
At this period, fights between the males of herds of mule deer, white-tailed deer and elk are of frequent occurrence, but in a wild state they rarely end in bloodshed or death, save from locked antlers.
Many times, however, two bucks will come together, and playfully push each other about without being angry.
Many pairs of bucks have been found with their antlers fast locked in death--and I never see a death lock without a feeling of grim satisfaction that neither of the quarrelsome brutes had had an opportunity to attack some defenseless man, and spear him to death.
The antlers of the common white-tailed deer seem peculiarly liable to become interlocked so tightly that it is well-nigh impossible to separate them.
And whenever this happens, the doom of both deer is sealed.
Unless found speedily and killed, they must die of starvation.
While it is quite true that two deer playing with their antlers may become locked fast, it is safe to say that the great majority meet their fate by charging each other with force sufficient to spring the beams of their antlers, and make the lock so perfect that no force they can exert will release it.
A deer cannot pull back with the same power it exerts in plunging forward.
All members of the deer family that I know follow the same natural law in regard to supremacy.
Indeed, this is true of nearly all animals.
Leadership is not always maintained by the largest and strongest member of a herd, but very often by the most pugnacious.
Sometimes a herd of elk is completely tyrannized by an old doe, who makes the young bucks fly from her in terror, when one prod of their sharp antlers would quickly send her to the rear.
When bucks in a state of freedom fight for supremacy, the weaker does not stay to be overthrown and speared to death by the victor.
As soon as he feels that he is mastered he releases his antlers at the first opportunity, flings himself to one side, and either remains in the herd as an acknowledged subject of the victor, or else seeks fresh fields and pastures new.
Battles in Zoological Parks.
In captivity, where escape is impossible, it is no uncommon thing for elk to kill each other.
In fact, with several adult males in a small enclosure, tragedies may always be expected in the autumn and early winter.
The process is very simple.
So long as the two elk can stand up and fight head to head, there are no casualties; but when one wearies and weakens before the other, its guard is broken.
Then one strong thrust in its side or shoulder sends it to the earth, badly wounded; and before it can rise, it is generally stabbed to death with horn thrusts into its lungs and liver.
But, as I said before, I have never known of a fatal duel between elk outside of a zoological garden or park.
One of the most novel and interesting fights that has yet taken place in the New York Zoological Park was a pitched battle between two cow elk--May Queen and the Dowager.
A bunch of black fungus suddenly appeared on the trunk of a tree, about twelve feet from the ground.
My attention was first called to this by seeing May Queen, a fine young cow, standing erect on her hind legs in order to reach the tempting morsel with her mouth.
A little later the Dowager, the oldest and largest cow elk in the herd, met her under the tree, whereupon the two made wry faces at each other, and champed their teeth together threateningly.
Suddenly both cows rose on their hind legs, struck out viciously with their sharp pointed front hoofs, and, after a lively sparring bout, they actually clinched.
The young cow got both front legs of the old cow between her own, where they were held practically helpless, and then with her own front hoofs she fiercely rained blows upon the ribs of her assailant.
The Dowager backed away and fled, completely vanquished, with May Queen close upon her heels; and thus was the tyrannical rule of the senior cow overthrown forever.
During the breeding season, our wild buffaloes of the great vanished herds were much given to fighting, and always through jealousy.
The bulls bellowed until they could be heard for miles, tore up earth and threw it into the air, rolled their eyes, and often rushed together in a terrifying manner; but beyond butting their heads, pushing and straining until the weaker turned and ran, nothing came of it all.
I have yet to find a man who ever saw a wild buffalo that had been wounded to the shedding of blood by another wild buffalo.
It is probable that no other species ever fought so fiercely and did so little damage as the American bison.
Elephants, Wolves, and Others.
In ordinary life the Indian elephant is one of the most even-tempered of all animals.
I have spent hours in watching wild herds in southern India, sometimes finding the huge beasts all around me, and in dangerously close proximity.
Several times I could have touched a wild elephant with a carriage whip, had I possessed one.
So far from fighting, I never saw an elephant threaten or even annoy another.
Elephants, being the most intelligent of all animals in the matter of training, have been educated to fight in the arena, usually by pushing each other head to head.
A fighting tusker can lord it over almost any number of tuskless elephants, because he can pierce their vitals, and they cannot pierce his.
A female fights by hitting with her head, striking her antagonist amidships, if possible.
Once when the late G. P. Sanderson was in a keddah, noosing wild elephants, and was assulted [sic] by a vicious tusker, his life was saved by a tame female elephant, whose boy driver caused her to attack the tusker with her head, and nearly bowl him over by the force of her blows upon his ribs.
In captivity, wolves are the meanest brutes on earth, and in a wild state they are no better.
As a rule, the stronger ones are ever ready to kill the weaker ones, and eat them, too.
One night, our male Russian wolf killed his mate, and ate nearly half of her before morning.
A fox or a wolf cub which thrusts one of its legs between the partition bars and into a wolf's den almost invariably gets it bitten off as close to the body as the biter can go.
In the arctic regions, north of the Great Slave Lake, "Buffalo" Jones and George Rea fought wolves incessantly for several days, and every wolf they wounded was immediately killed and devoured by its pack mates.
In captivity, a large proportion of mammals fight, more or less; and the closer the confinement, the greater their nervousness and irritability, and the more fighting.
Monkeys fight freely and frequently.
Serpents, lizards, and alligators rarely do, although large alligators are prone to bite off the tails or legs of their small companions, or even to devour them whole.
Storks, trumpeter swans, darters, jays, and some herons are so quarrelsome and dangerous that they must be kept well separated from other species, to prevent mutilation and murder.
In 1900, when a pair of trumpeter swans were put upon a lake in Prospect Park, Brooklyn, with three brown pelicans for associates, they promptly assailed the pelicans, dug holes in their backs, and killed all three.
The common red squirrel is a persistent fighter of the gray species, and, although inferior in size, nearly always wins.
A Fight Between a Whale and a Swordfish.
One of the strangest wild animal combats on record was thus described in the Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London, for 1909.
"Mr. Malcolm Maclaren, through Mr. C. Davies Sherborn, F. Z. S., called the attention of the Fellows to an account of a fight between a whale and a swordfish observed by the crew of the fishing-boat 'Daisy' in the Hauraki Gulf, between Ponui Island and Coromandel, as reported in the 'Auckland Weekly News,' 19th Nov., 1908.
A cow whale and her calf were attacked by a 12 ft. 6 in.
swordfish, the object of the fish being the calf.
The whale plunged about and struck in all directions with her flukes.
Occasionally the fins of the swordfish were seen as he rose from a dive, his object apparently being to strike from below.
For over a quarter of an hour the whale circled round her calf, lashing furiously and churning up the water so that the assailant was unable to secure a good opportunity for a thrust.
At last, after a fruitless dive, the swordfish came close up and made a thrust at the calf, but received a blow from the whale's flukes across the back, which apparently paralyzed it.
It was killed and hauled on board the boat without difficulty, while the whale and calf went off towards Coromandel with splashings and plungings.
The whale's blow had almost knocked off the back fin of the swordfish, and heavily bruised the flesh around it.
No threshers accompanied the swordfish."
Beyond question, as firearms and hunters multiply, all wild animals become more timid, less inclined to attack man, and also less inclined to attack one another.
The higher creatures are the most affected by man's destructiveness of animal life, and the struggle for existence has become so keen that fighting for the glory of supremacy, or as a pastime, will soon have no important place in the lives of wild animals.
XXIV WILD ANIMAL CRIMINALS AND CRIME Many human beings are "good" because they never have been under the harrow of circumstances, nor sufficiently tempted to do wrong.
It is only under the strain of strong temptation that human character is put through the thirty-third degree and tried out.
No doubt a great many of us could be provoked to join a mob for murder, or forced to steal, or tortured into homicidal insanity.
It is only under the artificial conditions of captivity, with loss of freedom, exemption from the daily fear of death, abundant food without compensating labor, and with every want supplied, that the latent wickedness of wild creatures comes to the surface.
A captive animal often reveals traits never recognized in the free individual.
"Satan finds some mischief still for idle hands to do."
These manifestations are of many kinds; but we propose to consider the criminal tendencies of wild animals both free and captive.
The persistence of the mental and moral parallelism between men and wild animals is a source of constant surprise.
In a state of freedom, untrammeled by anything save the fear of death by violence, the deer or the mountain sheep works out in his own way his chosen scheme for the survival of the fittest,--himself.
In the wilds we see very few manifestations of the criminal instinct.
A fight between wild elk bulls for the supremacy of a herd is not a manifestation of murder lust, but of obedience to the fundamental law of evolution that the largest, the strongest and the most courageous males of every herd shall do the breeding.
The killing of natural prey for daily food is not murder.
A starving wolf on the desolate barren grounds may even kill and devour a wounded pack-mate without becoming a criminal by that act alone.
True, such a manifestation of hard-heartedness and bad taste is very reprehensible; but its cause is hunger, not sheer blackness of heart.
Among wild animals, the wanton killing of a member of the killer's own species would constitute murder in the first degree, and so is all unnecessary and wanton killing outside the killer's own species.
To many a wild animal there comes at tunes the murder lust which under the spur of opportunity leads to genuine crime.
In some of the many cases that have come under my notice, the desire to commit murder for the sake of murder has been as sharply defined as the fangs or horns of the criminal.
Of the many emotions of wild animals which are revealed more sharply in captivity than in a state of nature, the crime-producing passions, of jealousy, hatred, desire for revenge, and devilish lust for innocent blood, are most prominent.
In the management of large animals in captivity, the criminal instinct is quite as great a trouble- breeder and source of anxiety as are wild-animal diseases, and the constant struggle with the elements.
In many cases there is not the slightest premonitory manifestation of murderous intent on the part of a potential criminal.
Indeed, with most cunning wisdom, a wild-animal murderer will often conceal his purpose until outside interference is an impossibility, and the victim is entirely helpless.
These manifestations of fiendish cunning and premeditation are very exasperating to those responsible for the care of animals in captivity.
In every well regulated zoological park, solitary confinement is regarded as an unhappy or intolerable condition.
Animals that live in herds and groups in large enclosures always exercise more, have better appetites, and are much more contented and happy than individuals that are singly confined.
To visitors, a happy and contented community of deer, antelopes, bears, wolves, or birds is a source of far more mental satisfaction than could be found in any number of solitary animals.
A small pen with a solitary animal in it at once suggests the prison-and-prisoner idea, and sometimes arouses pity and compassion rather than pleased admiration.
The peaceful herd or flock is the thing to strive for as the highest ideal attainable in an exhibition of wild animals.
But mark well the difficulties.
_All the obstacles encountered in carrying out the community idea are created by the evil propensities of the animals themselves._ Among the hoofed animals generally, every pair of horns and front hoofs is a possible storm-center.
No keeper knows whether the members of his herd of deer will live together in peace and contentment until tomorrow, or whether, on any autumn or winter night, a buck will suddenly develop in his antlered head the thought that it is a good time to "kill something."
In the pairing season we always watch for trouble, and the danger signal always is up.
In October a male elk may become ever so savage, and finally develop into a raging demon, dangerous to man and beast; but when he first manifests his new temper openly and in the broad light of day, we feel that he is treating fairly both his herd-mates and his keepers.
If he gives fair warning to the world about him, we must not class him as a mean criminal, no matter what he may do later on.
It is our duty to corral him at night according to the violence of his rage.
If we separate him from the herd, and he tears a fence in pieces and kills his rival, that is honest, open warfare, not foul murder.
But take the following case.
In October, 1905, the New York Zoological Park received from the state of Washington a young mule deer buck and two does.
Being conspicuous members of the worst species of "difficult" deer to keep alive at Atlantic tidewater, and being also very thin and weak, it required the combined efforts of several persons to keep them alive.
For six months they moped about their corral, but at last they began to improve.
The oldest doe gave birth to two fawns which actually survived.
But, even when the next mating season began, the buck continued to be lanquid and blase.
At no time did he exhibit signs of temper, of even suspicious vigor.
In the middle of the night of November 6, 1906, without the slightest warning, he decided to commit a murder, and the mother of the two nursing fawns was selected as the victim.
Being weak from the rearing of her offspring, she was at his mercy.
He gored her most savagely, about twenty times, and killed her.
That was deliberate, fiendish and cowardly murder.
The killing of any female animal by her male consort is murder; but there are circumstances wherein the plea of temporary insanity is an admissible defense.
In the autumn, male members of the deer family _often become temporarily insane and irresponsible,_ and should be judged accordingly.
With us, sexual insanity is a recognized disease.
Such distressing cases as the above are so common that whenever I go deer-hunting and kill a lusty buck, the thought occurs to me,-- "another undeveloped murderer, perhaps!"
The most exasperating thing about these corral murders is the cunning treachery of the murderers.
Here is another typical case: For three years a dainty little male Osceola deer from Florida was as gentle as a fawn and as harmless as a dove.
But one crisp morning Keeper Quinn, to whom every doe in his charge is like a foster-daughter, was horrified at finding blood on the absurd little antlers of the Osceola pet.
One of the females lay dead in a dark corner where she had been murdered during the night; and this with another and older buck in the same corral which might fairly have been regarded as an offensive rival.
The desire to murder for the sake of killing is born in some carnivorous animals, and by others it is achieved.
Among the largest and finest of the felines, the lions and tigers, midnight murders very rarely occur.
We never have known one.
Individual dislike is shown boldly and openly, and we are given a fair chance to prevent fatalities.
Among the lions, tigers, leopards, jaguars and pumas of the New York Zoological Park, there has been but one murder.
That was the crime of Lopez, the big jaguar, who richly deserved instant death as a punishment.
It was one of the most cunning crimes I have ever seen among wild animals, and is now historic.
For a year Lopez _pretended,_ ostentatiously, to be a good- natured animal!
Twenty times at least he acted the part of a playful pet, inviting me to reach in and stroke him.
At last we decided to give him a cage-mate, and a fine adult female jaguar was purchased.
The animals actually tried to caress each other through the bars, and the big male completely deceived us, one and all.
At the end of two days it was considered safe to permit the female jaguar to enter the cage of Lopez.
She was just as much deceived as we were.
An animal that is afraid always leaves its traveling- cage slowly and unwillingly, or refuses to leave it at all.
When the two sets of doors were opened, the female joyously walked into the cage of her treacherous admirer.
In an instant, Lopez rushed upon her, seized her whole neck in his powerful jaws, and crushed her cervical vertebrae by his awful bite.
We beat him over the head; we spiked him; we even tried to brain him; but he held her, as a bull-dog would hold a cat, until she was dead.
He had determined to murder her, but had cunningly concealed his purpose until his victim was fully in his power.
Bears usually fight "on the square," openly and above-board, rarely committing foul murder.
If one bear hates another, he attacks at the very first opportunity, He does not cunningly wait to catch the offender at a disadvantage and beyond the possibility of rescue.
Sometimes a captive bear kills a cage-mate or mauls a keeper, but not by the sneaking methods of the human assassin who shoots in the dark and runs away.
I do not count the bear as a common criminal, even though at rare intervals he kills a cage-mate smaller and weaker than himself.
One killing of that kind, done by Cinnamon Jim to a small black bear that had annoyed him beyond all endurance, was inflicted as a legitimate punishment, and was so recorded.
The attack of two large bears, a Syrian and a sloth bear, upon a small Japanese black bear, in which the big pair deliberately attempted to disembowel the small victim, biting him only in the abdomen, always has been a puzzle to me.
I cannot fathom the idea which possessed those two ursine minds; but I have no doubt that some of the book-making men who read the minds of wild animals as if they were open books could tell me all about it.
On the ice-pack in front of his stone hut at the north end of the Franz Josef Archipelago Nansen saw an occurrence that was plain murder.
A large male polar bear feeding upon a dead walrus was approached across the ice-pack by two polar-bear cubs.
The gorging male immediately stopped feeding and rushed toward the small intruders.
They turned and fled wildly; but the villain pursued them, far out upon the ice.
He overtook them, killed both, and then serenely returned to his solitary feast.
In February, 1907, a tragedy occurred in the Zoological Park which was a close parallel of the Lopez murder.
It was a case in which my only crumb of satisfaction was in my ability to say, "I told you so,"--than which no consolation can be more barren.
For seven years there had lived together in the great polar bears' den of the Zoological Park two full-grown, very large and fine polar bears.
They came from William Hagenbeck's great group, and both were males.
Their rough-and-tumble wrestling, both in the swimming pool and out of it, was a sight of almost perennial interest; and while their biting and boxing was of the roughest character, and frequently drew blood, they never got angry, and never had a real fight.
In the autumn of 1906 one of the animals sickened and died, and presently the impression prevailed that the survivor was lonesome.
The desirability of introducing a female companion was spoken of, but I was afraid to try the experiment.
By and by, Mr. Carl Hagenbeck, who had handled about forty polar bears to my one, wrote to us, offering a fine female polar as a mate to the survivor.
She was conceded to be one-third smaller than the big male, but was fully adult.
Without loss of time I answered, declining to make the purchase, on the ground that our male bear would kill the female.
It was my belief that even if he did not at once deliberately murder her, he soon would wear her out by his rough play.
Mr. Hagenbeck replied with the assurance that, in his opinion, all would be well; that, instead of a tragedy taking place, the male would be delighted with a female companion, and that the pair would breed.
As convincing proof of the sincerity of his views, Mr. Hagenbeck offered to lose half the purchase price of the female bear in the event that my worst fears were realized.
I asked the opinion of our head keeper of bears, and after due reflection he said: "Why, no; I don't believe he'd kill her.
He's not a _bad_ bear at all.
I think we could work it so that there would be no great trouble."
Mr. Hagenbeck's son also felt sure there would be no tragedy.
Quite against my own judgment of polar-bear character, but in deference to the expert opinion arrayed against mine, I finally yielded.
The female bear was purchased, and on her arrival she was placed for three weeks in the large shifting-cage which connects with the eastern side of the great polar bears' den.
The two animals seemed glad to see each other.
At once they fraternized through the bars, licked each other's noses, and ate their meals side by side.
At night the male always slept as near as possible to his new companion.
There was not a sign of ill temper; but, for all that, my doubts were ever present.
At last, after three full weeks of close acquaintance, it was agreed that there was nothing to be gained by longer delay in admitting the female to the large den.
But we made preparations for trouble.
The door of the sleeping-den was oiled and overhauled and put in thorough working order, so that if the female should dash into it for safety, a keeper could instantly slide the barrier and shut her in.
We provided pike-poles, long iron bars, lariats, meat, and long planks a foot wide.
Heartily wishing myself a hundred miles away, I summoned all my courage and gave the order: "Open her door, a foot only, and let her put her head out.
Keep him away."
The female bear had not the slightest fear or premonition of danger.
Thrusting her head through the narrow opening, she looked upon the world and the open sky above, and found that it was good.
She struggled to force the door open wider; and the male stood back, waiting.
"Let her go!"
Forcing the door back with her own eager strength, she fearlessly dropped the intervening eighteen inches to the floor of the den, and was free.
The very _next second_ the male flung his great bulk upon her, and the tragedy was on.
I would not for five thousand dollars see such a thing again.
A hundred times in the twenty minutes that followed I bitterly regretted my folly in acting contrary to my own carefully formed conclusions regarding the temper, the strength, and the mental processes of that male bear.
He never left her alone for ten seconds, save when, at five or six different times, we beat him off by literally ramming him away.
When she first fell, the slope of the floor brought her near the cage bars, which gave us a chance to fight for her.
We beat him over the head; we drove big steel spikes into him; and we rammed him with planks, not caring how many bones we might break.
But each time that we beat him off, and the poor harried female rose to her feet, he flung himself upon her anew, crushed her down upon the snow, and fought to reach her throat!
Gallantly the female fought for her life, with six wild men to help her.
After a long battle,--it seemed like hours, but I suppose it was between twenty and thirty minutes, the male bear recognized the fact that so long as the female lay near the bars his own punishment would continue and the end would be postponed.
Forthwith he seized his victim and dragged her inward and down to the ice that covered the swimming-pool in the centre of the den, beyond our reach.
The floor of the den was so slippery from ice and snow that it was utterly unsafe for any of our men to enter and try to approach the now furious animal within striking distance.
Very quickly some choice pieces of fresh meat were thrown within six feet of the bears, in the hope that the male would be tempted away from his victim.
In vain!
Then, with all possible haste, Keeper Mulvehill coiled a lasso, bravely entered the den, and with the first throw landed the noose neatly around the neck of the male bear.
In a second it was jerked taut, the end passed through the bars, and ten eager arms dragged the big bear away from his victim and close up to the bars.
Another lariat was put on him to guard against breakages, and no bear ever missed being choked to death by a narrower margin than did that one.
That morsel of revenge was sweet.
While he was held thus, two men went in and attached a rope to the now dying female, and she was quickly dragged into the shifting-cage.
But the rescue came too late.
At the last moment on the ice, the canine teeth of the big bear had severed the jugular vein of the female, and in two minutes after her rescue she was dead.
It is my belief that at first the male did not intend to murder the female.
I think his first impulse was to play with her, as he had always done with the male comrade of his own size.
But the _joy of combat_ seized him, and after that his only purpose was to kill.
My verdict was, not premeditated murder, but murder in the second degree.
In the order of carnivorous animals, I think the worst criminals are found in the Marten Family (_Mustelidae_); and if there is a more murderous villain than the mink, I have yet to find him out.
The mink is a midnight assassin, who loves slaughter for the joy of murder.
The wolverine, the marten, mink and weasel are all courageous, savage and merciless.
To the wolverine Western trappers accord the evil distinction of being a veritable imp of darkness on four legs.
To them he is the arch-fiend, beyond which animal cunning and depravity cannot go.
Excepting the profane history of the pickings and stealings of this "mountain devil" as recorded by suffering trappers, I know little of it; but if its instincts are not supremely murderous, its reputation is no index of its character.
The mink, however, is a creature that we know and fear.
Along the rocky shores of the Bronx River, even in the Zoological Park, it perversely persisted long after our park-building began.
In spite of traps, guns, and poison, and the killing of from three to five annually in our Park, _Putorius vison_ would not give up.
With us, the only creatures that practiced wholesale and unnecessary murder were minks and dogs.
The former killed our birds, and during one awful period when a certain fence was being rebuilt, the latter destroyed several deer.
A mink once visited an open-air yard containing twenty-two pinioned laughing gulls, and during that _noche triste_ killed all of those ill-fated birds.
It did not devour even one, and it sucked the blood of only two or three.
On another tragic occasion a mink slaughtered an entire flock of fifteen gulls; but its joy of killing was short-lived, for it was quickly caught and clubbed to death.
A miserable little weasel killed three fine brant geese, purely for the love of murder; and then he departed this life by the powder-and-lead route.
All the year round captive buffalo bulls are given to fighting, and for one bull to injure or kill another is an occurrence all too common.
Even in the great twenty-seven thousand acre reserve of the Corbin Blue Mountain Forest Association, fatal fights sometimes occur.
It was left to a large bull named Black Beauty, in our Zoological Park herd, to reveal the disagreeable fact that under certain circumstances a buffalo may become a cunning and deliberate assassin.
In the spring of 1904, a new buffalo bull, named Apache, was added to the portion of our herd which up to that time had been dominated by Black Beauty.
We expected the usual head-to-head battle for supremacy, succeeded by a period of peace and quiet.
It is the law of the herd that after every contest for supremacy the vanquished bull shall accept the situation philosophically, and thereafter keep his place.
At the end of a half-hour of fierce struggle, head-to-head, Black Beauty was overpowered by Apache, and fled from him into the open range.
To emphasize his victory, Apache followed him around and around at a quiet walk, for several hours; but the beaten bull always kept a factor of safety of about two hundred feet between himself and the master of the herd.
Convinced that Black Beauty would no longer dispute his supremacy, Apache at last pronounced for peace and thought no more about the late unpleasantness.
His rival seemed to accept the situation, and rejoined the herd on the subdued status of an ex-president.
For several days nothing occurred; but all the while Black Beauty was biding his time and watching for an opportunity.
At last it came.
As Apache lay dozing and ruminating on a sunny hill-side, his beaten rival quietly drifted around his resting-place, stealthily secured a good position, and, without a second's warning plunged his sharp horns deep into the lungs of the reclining bull.
With the mad energy of pent-up and superheated fury, the assassin delivered stab after stab into the unprotected side of the helpless victim, and before Apache could gain his feet he had been gored many times.
He lived only a few minutes.
It was foul murder, fully premeditated; and had Black Beauty been my personal property, he would have been executed for the crime, without any objections, or motions, or appeals, or far-fetched certificates of unreasonable doubt.
During the past twenty years a number of persons have been treacherously murdered by animals they had fed and protected.
One of the most deplorable of these tragedies occurred late in 1906, near Montclair, New Jersey.
Mr. Herbert Bradley was the victim.
While walking through his deer park, he was wantonly attacked by a white-tailed buck and murdered on the spot.
At Helena, Montana, a strong man armed with a pitchfork was killed by a bull elk.
There have been several other fatalities from elk.
The greater number of such crimes as the above have been committed by members of the Deer Family (deer, elk, moose and caribou).
The hollow-horned ruminants seem to be different.
I believe that toward their keepers the bison, buffaloes and wild cattle entertain a certain measure of respect that in members of the Deer Family often is totally absent.
But there are exceptions; and a very sad and notable case was the murder of Richard W. Rock, of Henry's Lake, Idaho, in 1903.
Dick Rock was a stalwart ranchman in the prime of life, who possessed a great fondness for big-game animals.
He lived not far from the western boundry of the Yellowstone Park.
He liked to rope elk and moose in winter, and haul them on sleds to his ranch; to catch mountain goats or mule deer for exhibition; and to breed buffaloes.
His finest bull buffalo, named Indian, was one of his favorites, and was broken _to ride!_ Scores of times Rock rode him around the corral, barebacked and without bridle or halter.
Rock felt that he could confidently trust the animal, and he never dreamed of guarding himself against a possible evil day.
But one day the blood lust seized the buffalo, and he decided to assassinate his best friend.
The next time Dick Rock entered the corral, closing the gate and fastening it securely,--thus shutting himself in,--the big bull attacked him so suddenly and fiercely that there was not a moment for either escape or rescue.
We can easily estimate the suddenness of the attack by the fact that alert and active Dick Rock had not time even to climb upon the fence of the corral, whereby his life would have been saved.
With a mighty upward thrust, the treacherous bull drove one of his horns deeply into his master's body, and impaled him so completely and so securely that the man hung there and died there!
As a crowning horror, the bull was unable to dislodge his victim, and the body of the ranchman was carried about the corral on the horns of his assassin until the horrified wife went a mile and a half and summoned a neighbor, who brought a rifle and executed the murderer on the spot.
Such sudden onslaughts as this make it unsafe to trust implicitly, and without recourse, to the good temper of any animal having dangerous horns.
If bird-lovers knew the prevalence of the murder instinct among the feathered folk, no doubt they would be greatly shocked.
Many an innocent-looking bird is really a natural villain without opportunity to indulge in crime.
It is in captivity that the wickedness inherent in wild creatures comes to the surface and becomes visible.
In the open, the weak ones manage to avoid danger, and to escape when threatened; but, with twenty birds in one large cage, escape is not always possible.
A "happy-family" of a dozen or twenty different species often harbors a criminal in its midst; and when the criminal cunningly waits until all possibilities of rescue are eliminated, an assassination is the result.
[Illustration with caption: RICHARD W. ROCK AND HIS BUFFALO MURDERER This bison treacherously killed the man soon after this picture was made] [Illustration with caption: "BLACK BEAUTY" MURDERING "APACHE"] Here is a partial list of the crimes in our bird collection during one year: A green jay killed a blue jay.
A jay-thrush and several smaller birds were killed by laughing thrushes,--which simply love to do murder!
A nightingale was killed by a catbird and two mocking- birds.
Two snake-birds killed a third one--all of them thoroughly depraved villains.
Three gulls murdered another; a brown pelican was killed by trumpeter-swans; and a Canada goose was killed by a gull.
All these victims were birds in good health.
It is deplorable, but nevertheless true, that in large mixed companies of birds, say where forty or fifty live together, it is a common thing for a sick bird to be set upon and killed, unless rescued by the keepers.
In crimes of this class birds often murder their own kind, but they are quite as ready to kill members of other species.
In 1902 a sick brant goose was killed by its mates; and so were a red-tailed hawk, two saras cranes, two black vultures, a road-runner, and a great horned owl.
An aged and sickly wood ibis was killed by a whooping crane; and a night heron killed its mate.
Strange as it may seem, among reptiles there is far less of real first-degree murder than among mammals and birds.
Twenty rattlesnakes may be crowded together in one cage, without a family jar.
Even among cobras, perhaps the most irritable and pugnacious of all serpents, I think one snake never wantonly murders another, although about once in twenty years one will try to swallow another.
The big pythons and anacondas never fight, nor try to commit murder.
And yet, a twenty-foot regal python with a bad heart--like Nansen's polar bear--could easily constrict and kill any available snake of smaller size.
At this moment I do not recall one instance of wanton murder among serpents.
It is well known that some snakes devour other snakes; but that is not crime.
The record of the crocodilians is not so clear.
It is a common thing for the large alligators in our Reptile House to battle for supremacy and in these contests several fatalities have occurred.
Some of these occurrences are not of the criminal sort; but when a twelve-foot alligator attacks and kills a six-foot individual, entirely out of his class and far too small to fight with him, it is murder.
An alligator will seize the leg of a rival and by violently whirling around on his axis, like a revolving shaft, twist the leg completely off.
Among sea creatures, the clearly defined criminal instinct, as exhibited aside from the never-ending struggle for existence and the quest of food, is rarely observed, possibly because opportunities are so few.
The sanguinary exploits of the grampus, or whale-killer, among whales small enough to be killed and eaten, are the onslaughts of a marine glutton in quest of food.
Among the fishes there is one murderer whose evil reputation is well deserved.
The common swordfish of the Atlantic, forty miles or so off Block Island or Montauk Point, is not only one of the most fearless of all fishes, but it also is the most dangerous.
His fierce attacks upon the boats of men who have harpooned him and seek to kill him are well known, and his unparalleled courage fairly challenges our wonder and admiration.
But, unfortunately, the record of the swordfish is stained with crime.
When the spirit of murder prompts him to commit a crime in sheer wantonness, he will attack a whale, stab the unfortunate monster again and again, and pursue it until it is dead.
This is prompted solely by brutality and murder lust, for the swordfish feeds upon fish, and never attempts to eat any portion of a whale.
It can easily be proved that wild animals in a normal state of nature are by no means as much given to murder, either of their own kind or other kinds, as are many races of men.
The infrequency of animal murders cannot be due wholly to the many possibilities for the intended victim to escape, nor to difficulty in killing.
In every wild species murders are abundantly possible; but it is wholly against the laws of nature for free wild beasts to kill one another in wantonness.
It is left to the savage races of men to commit murders without cause, and to destroy one another by fire.
The family crimes and cruelties of people both civilized and savage completely eclipse in blackness and in number the doings of even the worst wild beasts.
In wild animals and in men, crime is an index to character.
The finest species of animals and the noblest races of men are alike distinguished by their abhorrence of the abuse of the helpless and the shedding of innocent blood.
The lion, the elephant, the wild horse, the grizzly bear, the orang-utan, the eagle and the whooping crane are singularly free from the criminal instinct.
On the other hand, even today Africa contains tribes whose members are actually fond of practicing cruelty and murder.
In the Dark Continent there has lived many a "king" beside whom a hungry lion or a grizzly bear is a noble citizen.
XXV FIGHTING WITH WILD ANIMALS The study of the intelligence and temperaments of wild animals is by no means a pursuit of academic interest only.
Men now are mixing up with dangerous wild beasts far more extensively than ever before, and many times a life or death issue hangs upon the man's understanding of the animal mind.
I could cite a long and gruesome list of trainers, keepers and park owners who have been killed by the animals they did not correctly understand.
Not long ago, it was a park owner who was killed by a dangerous deer.
Next it was a bull elk who killed the keeper who undertook to show that the animal was afraid of him.
In Idaho we saw a death-penalty mistake with a bull buffalo.
Recently, in Spain, an American ape trainer was killed by his big male chimpanzee.
Recently in Switzerland a snake-charmer was strangled and killed on the stage by her python.
Men who keep or who handle dangerous animals owe it to themselves, their heirs and their assigns to _know the animal mind and temperament, and to keep on the safe side._ In view of the tragedies and near-tragedies that animal trainers and keepers have been through during the past twenty years, I am desirous of so vividly exhibiting the wild animal mind and temper that at least a few of the mistakes of the past may be avoided in the future.
Fortunately I am able to state that thus far no one ever has been killed by an animal in the Zoological Park; but several of our men have been severely hurt.
The writer hereof carries two useless fingers on his best hand as a reminder of a fracas with a savage bear.
How Dangerous Animals Attack Men.
The following may be listed as the wild animals most dangerous to man: 1.
In the open: Alaskan brown bears, the grizzly bears, lion, tiger, elephant, leopard, wolf, African buffalo, Indian gaur and buffalo, and gorilla.
All these species are dangerous to the man who meddles with them, either to kill or to capture them.
If they are not molested by man, there is very little to fear from any of them save the man- eating lions, and tigers, the northern wolf packs, Alaskan brown bears and rogue elephants.
2.
In captivity, or in process of capture: Under this head a special list may be thus composed: Male elk and deer in the rutting season; male elephants over fifteen years of age; all bears over one year of age, and especially "pet" bears; all gorillas, chimpanzees and orangs over seven years of age (puberty); all adult male baboons, gibbons, rhesus monkeys, callithrix or green monkeys, Japanese red-faced monkeys and large macaques; many adult bison bulls and cows of individually bad temper; also gaur, Old World buffalo, anoa bulls, many individually bad African antelopes, gnus and hartebeests; all lions, tigers, jaguars, leopards, wolves, hyenas, and all male zebras and wild asses over four years of age.
How they attack.
The _lion, tiger and bear_ launches at a man's head or face a lightning-quick and powerful fore-paw blow that in one stroke tears the skin and flesh in long gashes, and knocks down the victim with stunning force.
Before recovery is possible the assailant rushes to the prostrate man and begins to bite or to tear him.
Instinctively the fallen man covers his face with his arms, and with the lion, tiger and leopard the arms come in for fearful punishment.
It is the way of carnivorous beasts to attack each other head to head and mouth to mouth, and this same instinct leads these animals to focus their initial attacks upon the heads and faces of their human quarry.
After a man-eating lion or tiger has reduced the human victim to a state of non-resistance, the great beast seizes the man by a bite embracing the chest, and with the feet dragging upon the ground rushes off to a place of safety to devour him at leisure.
Dr. David Livingston was seized alive by a lion, and carried I forget how many yards without a stop.
His left humerus was broken in the onset, but the lion abandoned him without doing him any further serious harm.
Once I could not believe that a lion or a tiger could pick up a man in his mouth and rapidly carry him off, as a fox gets away with a chicken; but when I shot a male tiger weighing 495 pounds, standing 37 inches high and measuring 35 inches around his jaws, I was forever convinced.
In the Malay Peninsula Captain Syers told me that a tiger leaped a stockade seven feet high, seized a Chinese woodcutter, leaped out with him, and carried him away.
In a scrimmage with a lion or tiger in the open, the fight is not prolonged.
It is a case of kill or be killed quickly.
The time of times for steady nerves and perfectly accurate shooting is when a lion, tiger or bear charges the hunter at full speed, beginning sufficiently far away to give the hunter a sporting chance.
_The hunter can not afford to be "scared!
"_ It is liable to cost too much!
The Alaskan brown bear has a peculiar habit.
Occasionally he kills the hunter he has struck down, but very often he contents himself with biting his victim on his fleshy parts, _literally from head to foot._ More than one unfortunate amateur hunter has been fearfully bitten without having a bone broken, and without having an important artery or vein severed.
Such unfortunates lie upon their faces, with their arms protecting their heads as best they can, and take the awful punishment until the bear tires of it and goes away.
Then they _crawl,_ on hands and knees, to come within reach of discovery and help.
In the annals of Alaska's frontier life there are some heart-rending records of cases such as I have described, coupled with some marvellous recoveries.
Strange to say, bear bites or scratches _almost never produce blood poisoning!_ This seems very strange, for the bites of lions, tigers and leopards very frequently end in blood poisoning, incurable fever and death.
This probably is due to the clean mouth of the omnivorous bear and the infected mouth of the large cats, from putrid meat between their teeth.
_The wolf_ is particularly dangerous to his antagonists, man or beast, from the cutting power of his fearful snap.
His molar teeth shear through flesh and small bones like the gash of a butcher's cleaver; and his wide gape and lightning-quick movements render him a very dangerous antagonist.
The bite of a wolf is the most dangerous to man of any animal bite to which keepers are liable, and it is the law of zoological gardens and parks that every wolf bite means a quick application of anti- rabies treatment at a Pasteur institute.
Personally, I would be no more scared by a wolf-bite than by a feline bite, but the verdict of the jury is,--"it is best to be on the safe side."
_Buck elk and deer_ very, very rarely attack men in the wilds, unless they have been wounded and brought to bay; and then very naturally they fight furiously.
It is the attacks of captive or park-bred animals that are most to be feared.
All the deer that I know attack in the same way,--first by a _slow_ push forward, in order to come to close quarters _without getting hurt,_ and then follows the relentless push, push, push to get up steam for the final raging and death-dealing drive.
Even in fighting each other, buck elk and deer do not come together with a long run and a grand crash.
Each potential fighter _fears for his own eyes,_ and conserves them by a cautious and deliberate engaging process.
This is referred to in another chapter.
Fortunately for poor humanity, the same slow and cautious tactics are adopted when a buck deer or wapiti decides to attack a man.
This gives the man in the case a chance to put up his defense.
The attacking deer lowers his head, throws his antlers far to the front, and pushes for the body of the man.
The instant a tine touches the soft breast or abdomen, he lunges forward to drive it in.
But thanks to that life-saving slow start, the man is mercifully afforded a few seconds of time in which to save himself, or at least delay the punishment.
No man ever should enter the enclosure of a "bad" deer, or any buck deer in the rut, without a stout and tough club or pitchfork for defense.
Of the two weapons, the former is the best.
In the first place, keep away from all bad deer, especially between October and January first.
If you are beset, follow these instructions, as you value your life: If unarmed, seize the deer by the antlers before he touches your vitals, hold on for all you are worth, and _shout for help.
Keep your feet,_ just as long as you possibly can.
Never mind being threshed about, so long as you keep your feet and keep the tines out of your vitals.
Your three hopes are (1) that help will come, (2) or that you can come within reach of a club or some shelter, or (3) that the animal will in some manner decide to desist,--a most forlorn hope.
With a good club, or even a stout walking-stick, you have a fighting chance.
As the animal lowers his head and comes close up to impale you on his spears of bone, hit him a smashing blow _across the side of his head, or his nose._ In a desperate situation, _aim at the eye,_ and lay on the blows.
If your life is in danger from a buck elk or a large deer, do not hesitate about putting out an eye for him.
What are a thousand deer eyes compared with a twelve inch horn thrust through your stomach?
My standing instructions to our keepers of dangerous animals are: "Save your own life, at all hazards.
Don't let a dangerous animal kill you.
Kill any animal rather than let it kill you!"
It is useless to strike a charging deer on the top of its head, or on its antlers.
Give a sweeping _side_ blow for the unprotected cheek and jaw, or the tender nose.
There is nothing that a club can do that is so disconcerting as the eye and nose attack, for a badly injured eye always shuts both eyes, automatically.
Once when alone in the corral of the axis deer herd, I was treacherously and wantonly attacked by a full-grown buck.
I had violated my own rules about going in armed with a stick, and it was lucky for me that the axis deer was not as large as the barasingha or the mule deer.
As the buck lowered his head, threw his long, sharp beams straight forward, and pushed for my vitals, I seized him by both antlers, to make my defense.
At that he drove forward and nearly upset me.
Quickly I let go the right antler and shifted myself to the animal's left side, where by means of the left antler I pulled the struggling buck's head around to my side.
Then he began to plunge.
Throwing the weight of my chest upon his shoulders I reached over him and with my free hand finally grasped his right foreleg below the knee, and pulled it up clear of the ground.
With that I had him.
He tried to struggle free, but I was strong in those days, and angry besides, and he was helpless.
Up beside the deer barn, most providentially for the finish, I saw a very beautiful barrel stave.
It was the very thing!
I worked him over to it, caught it up, and then still holding him by his left antler I laid that stave along his side until he was well punished, and glad when released to rush from that neighborhood.
Female "pet" deer, and female elk, can and do put up dangerous fights with their front hoofs, standing high up on their hind legs and striking fast and furiously.
A gentleman of my acquaintance was thus attacked, most unexpectedly, by his pet white-tailed deer doe.
She struck about a dozen times for his breast, and his vest and coat were slit open in several places.
I once saw two cow elk engage with their front feet in a hot fight, but they did no real damage.
Of course an angry _bison, buffalo or gaur_ lowers its head in attacking a man, and seeks to gore and toss him at the same moment.
The American bison will start at a distance of ten or twenty yards, and with half lowered head jump forward, grunting "Uh!
Uh!
Uh!"
as he comes.
When close up he pauses for a second and poises his head for the toss.
That is the man's one chance.
At that instant he must strike the animal on the side of his head, and strike hard; and the region of the eye is the spot at which to aim.
Once we were greatly frightened by the determined charge of a savage cow bison upon Keeper McEnroe, who was armed with a short- handled 4-tine pitchfork.
As she grunted and came for him we could not refrain from shouting a terrorized warning, "Look out, McEnroe!
Look out!"
He looked out.
He stood perfectly still, and calmly awaited the onset.
The cow rushed close up, and dropped her chin low down for the goring toss.
The keeper was ready for her.
Swinging his pitchfork he delivered a smashing blow upon the left side of the cow's head, which disconcerted and checked her.
Before she could recover herself he smashed her again, and again.
Then she turned tail and ran, followed by the shouts of the multitude.
_Adult male elephants_ are among the most dangerous of all wild animals to keep in captivity.
They _will_ grow bad- tempered with adult age, keepers _will_ become careless of danger that is present every day, and a bad elephant often is a cunning and deceitful devil.
The strength of an elephant is so great, the toughness of its hide is so pronounced, and the danger of a sudden attack is so permanent that life in a park with a "bad" elephant is one continuous nightmare.
Naturally we have been ambitious to prevent all manner of fatal wild beast attacks upon our keepers.
We try our best to provide for their safety, and having done that to the limit we say: "Now it is up to you to preserve your own life.
If you can not save yourself from your bad animals, no other person can do it for you!"
Either positively, comparatively or superlatively, a bad elephant is a cunning, treacherous and dangerous animal.
We have seen several elephants in various stages of cussedness.
Alice, the adult Indian female, is mentally a freak, but she is not vicious save under one peculiar combination of circumstances.
Take her outside her yard, and instantly she becomes a storm centre.
Gunda was bad to begin with, worse in continuation and murderously worst at his finish.
At present Kartoum is dangerous only to inanimate fences and doors.
A wild elephant attacks a hunter by charging furiously and persistently, sometimes making a real man-chase, seizing the man or knocking him down, and then impaling him upon his tusks as he lies.
More than one hunter has been knocked down, and escaped the impalement thrust only through the mercy of heaven that caused the tusks to miss him and expend their murderous fury in the ample earth.
On rare occasions an enraged wild elephant deliberately tramples a man to death; and there is one instance on record wherein the elephant held his dead native victim firmly to the ground while he tore him asunder "and actually jerked his arms and legs to some distance."
In captivity a mean elephant kills a keeper, or other person, by suddenly knocking him down, and then either trampling upon him or impaling him.
Gunda, our big male Indian tusker, was the worst elephant with which I ever came in close touch, and we hope never to see his like again.
When about ten years old he came to us direct from Assam, and when I saw his big and bulging eyes, and the slits torn in his ears, I recognized him as a bad-tempered animal.
I kept my opinions to myself.
Two weeks later when we started Gunda's Hindu keeper back toward his native land, I sent for Keepers Gleason and Forester to give them a choice lot of instruction in elephant management.
They heard me through attentively, and then Forester said very solemnly: "Director, I think that is a bad elephant; and I'm afraid of him!"
Keeper Gleason willingly took him over, on condition that he should have sole charge of him, and as long as Gleason remained in our service he managed the elephant successfully.
Elsewhere I have spoken at length of Gunda's mind and manners.
He went steadily from bad to worse; but we never once really punished him.
The time was when there was only one man in the world whom he feared, and would obey, and that was his keeper, Walter Thuman.
I have seen that great dangerous beast cower and quake with fear, and back off into a corner, when Thuman's powerful voice yelled at him, and admonished him to behave himself.
But all that ended on the day that he "got" Thuman.
On that fateful afternoon, with no visitors present, Thuman opened the outside door, took Gunda by the left ear, and with his steel- shod elephant hook in his left hand started to lead the huge animal out into his yard.
Just inside the doorway Gunda thought he saw his chance, and he took it.
With a fierce sidewise thrust of his head he struck his keeper squarely on the shoulder and sent him plunging to the floor in the stall corner nearest him.
Then, instantly he wheeled about and started to follow up his attack.
In the fall Thuman's hook flew from his hand.
At first Gunda tried to step on him, but he lay so close into the corner that the elephant could not plant his feet so that they would do execution.
Then he tried to kneel upon the keeper, with the same result.
Thuman struggled more closely into the corner, and tried hard to pull himself into the refuse box, through its low door; but with his trunk Gunda caught him by a leg and dragged him back.
Then he made a fierce downward thrust with his tusks, which were nearly four feet long, to transfix his intended victim.
His left tusk struck the steel-clad wall and shattered into fragments, half way up.
The resounding crash of that breaking tusk was what saved Thuman's life.
Gunda thrust again and again with his sound tusk, with the terrified and despairing keeper trying to cling to the broken tusk and save himself.
At last the point of the sound tusk drove full and fair through the flat of Thuman's left thigh, as he lay, and stopped against the concrete floor.
Experienced animal men always are listening for sounds of trouble.
In the cage of Alice, three cages and a vestibule distant, Keeper Dick Richards was busily working, when he heard the peculiar crash of that shattered tusk.
"What's all that!"
said he; and "That's some trouble," was his own answer.
Grabbing his pitchfork he shot out of that cage, ran down the keeper's passage and in about ten seconds' arrived in front of Gunda's cage.
And there was Gunda, killing Walter Thuman.
Richards darted in between the widely-separated front bars, gave a wild yell, and with a fierce thrust drove all the tines of his pitchfork into Gunda's unprotected hind-quarters, where the skin was thin and vulnerable.
With a shrill trumpet scream of pain and rage, Gunda whirled away from Thuman, bolted through the door, and rushed madly into his yard.
Keeper Thuman survived, and his recovery was presently accomplished.
When I first called to see him he begged me not to kill Gunda for what he had done, or tried to do.
In due course Thuman got well, and again took charge of Gunda; but after that the elephant was not afraid of him.
We adopted a policy which prevented further accidents, but finally Gunda became a hopeless case of sexual insanity and lust for murder.
When Gunda became most dangerous, we protected our keepers by chaining his feet, and keeping the men out of the reach of his trunk.
Because of this, his fury was boundless; and as soon as it was apparent that he was suffering from his confinement and never would be any better, we quickly decided to end it all.
He was painlessly put to death, by Mr. Carl E. Akeley, with a single .26 calibre bullet very skilfully sent through the elephant's brain.
_Chimpanzees and Orang-Utans_ attack and fight men just as they attack each other,--by biting the face and neck, and the hands, shoulders and arms.
The fighting ape always reaches out, seizes the arm or wrist of the person to be harmed, drags it up to his mouth and bites savagely.
As a home illustration of this method of attack, a chimpanzee named Chico in the Central Park Menagerie once bit a finger from the hand of his keeper.
In April, 1921, Mr. Ellis Joseph, the animal dealer, was very severely bitten on his face and neck by his own chimpanzee, so much so in fact that eighteen stitches were required to sew up his lacerations.
One excellent thing about the manners of chimpanzees and orang- utans in captivity and on the stage is that they do not turn deadly dangerous all in a moment, as do bears and elephants, and occasionally deer.
The ape who is falling from grace goes gradually, and gives warning signs that wise men recognize.
They first become strong and boisterous, then they playfully resist and defy the keeper's restraining hand.
Next in order they openly become angry at their keepers over trifles, and bristle up, stamp on the floor and savagely yell.
It is then that the whip and the stick become not only useless but dangerous to the user, and must be discarded.
It is then that new defensive tactics must be inaugurated, and the keeper must see to it that the big and dangerous ape gets no advantage.
This means the exercise of good strategy, and very careful management in cage-cleaning.
It calls for two cages for each dangerous ape.
There is only one thing in this world of which our three big chimps are thoroughly afraid, and that is an absurd little _toy gun_ that cost about fifty cents, and looks it.
No matter how bad Boma may be acting, if Keeper Palmer says in a sharp tone, "_Where's that gun!_" Boma hearkens and stops short, and if the "gun" is shown in front of his cage he flies in terror to the top of his second balcony, and cowers in a corner.
Why are those powerful and dangerous apes afraid of that absurd toy?
I do not know.
Perhaps the answer is--instinct; but if so, how was it acquired?
The natives of the chimp country do not have many firearms, and the white man's guns have been seen and heard by not more than one out of every thousand of that chimp population.
Baboons Throw Stones.
So far as we are aware, baboons are the only members of the Order Primates who ever deliberately throw missiles as means of offense.
In 1922 there was in the New York Zoological Park a savage and aggressive Rhodesian baboon (_Choiropithecus rhodesiae,_ Haagner) which throws stones at people whenever he can get hold of such missiles.
We have seen him set up against Keeper Palmer and Curator Ditmars a really vigorous bombardment with stones and coal that had been supplied him.
His throw was by means of a vigorous underhand pitch, and but for the intervening bars he would have done very good execution.
Keeper Rawlinson, of the Primate House, who was in the Boer War, states that on one occasion when his company was deploying along the steep side of a rock-covered kopje a troop of baboons above them rolled and threw so many stones down at the men that finally two machine guns were let loose on the savage beasts to disperse them.
THE CURTAIN On one side of the heights above the River of Life stand the men of this little world,--the fully developed, the underdone, and the unbaked, in one struggling, seething mass.
On the other side, and on a level but one step lower down, stands the vanguard of the long procession of "Lower" Animals, led by the chimpanzee, the orang and the gorilla.
The natural bridge that _almost_ spans the chasm lacks only the keystone of the arch.
Give the apes just one thing,--_speech,_--and the bridge is closed!
Take away from a child its sight, speech and hearing, and the whole world is a mystery, which only the hardest toil of science and education ever can reveal.
Give back hearing and sight, without speech, and even then the world is only half available.
Give a chimpanzee articulate expression and language, and no one could fix a limit to his progress.
Take away from a man the use of one lobe of his brain, and he is rendered speechless.
The great Apes have travelled up the River of Life on the opposite side from Man, but they are only one lap behind him.
Let us not deceive ourselves about that.
Remember that truth is inexorable in its demands to be heard.
We need not rack our poor, finite minds over the final problem of evolution, or the final destiny of Man and Ape.
We cannot prove anything beyond what we see.
We do not know, and we never can know, whether the chimpanzee has a "soul" or not; and we cannot _prove_ that the soul of man is immortal.
If man possesses a soul of lofty stature, why not a soul of lowly stature for the chimpanzee?
We do not know just _where_ "heaven" is; and we cannot know until we find it.
But what does it all matter on earth, if we keep to the straight path, and rest our faith upon the Great Unseen Power that we call God?
Said the great Poet of Nature in his ode "To a Waterfowl:"    "He who from zone to zone Guides through the boundless Sky thy certain flight, In the long way that I must tread     alone Will lead my steps aright."
CURTAIN.
BY WILLIAM T. HORNADAY THE MINDS AND MANNERS OF WILD ANIMALS CAMP FIRES ON DESERT AND LAVA CAMP FIRES IN THE CANADIAN ROCKIES TAXIDERMY AND ZOOLOGICAL COLLECTING TWO YEARS IN THE JUNGLE The Experiences of a Hunter and Naturalist in India, Ceylon, the Malay Peninsula and Borneo.
Illustrated.
8 vo.
THE AMERICAN NATURAL HISTORY A Foundation of Useful Knowledge of the Higher Animals of North America.
Four Crown Octavo Volumes, Illustrated in colors and half-tones.
THE SAME Royal 8 vo.
Complete in one volume.
OUR VANISHING WILD LIFE Its Extermination and Preservation.
End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Minds and Manners of Wild Animals by William T. Hornaday *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WILD ANIMALS *** This file should be named 6052.txt or 6052.zip Produced by Ralph Zimmermann, Charles Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.
Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US unless a copyright notice is included.
Thus, we usually do not keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections, even years after the official publication date.
Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.
A preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment and editing by those who wish to do so.
Most people start at our Web sites at: https://gutenberg.org or http://promo.net/pg These Web sites include award-winning information about Project Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).
Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement can get to them as follows, and just download by date.
This is also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.
http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03 or ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03 Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90 Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want, as it appears in our Newsletters.
Information about Project Gutenberg (one page) We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.
The time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.
Our projected audience is one hundred million readers.
If the value per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2 million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+ We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002 If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.
The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers, which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.
Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated): eBooks Year Month     1  1971 July    10  1991 January   100  1994 January  1000  1997 August  1500  1998 October  2000  1999 December  2500  2000 December  3000  2001 November  4000  2001 October/November  6000  2002 December*  9000  2003 November* 10000  2004 January* The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.
We need your donations more than ever!
As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts, Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.
We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones that have responded.
As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.
In answer to various questions we have received on this: We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally request donations in all 50 states.
If your state is not listed and you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have, just ask.
While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to donate.
International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are ways.
Donations by check or money order may be sent to: Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation PMB 113 1739 University Ave. Oxford, MS 38655-4109 Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment method other than by check or money order.
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN [Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.
Donations are tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.
As fund-raising requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.
We need your donations more than ever!
You can get up to date donation information online at: https://www.gutenberg.org/donation.html *** If you can't reach Project Gutenberg, you can always email directly to: Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com> Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.
We would prefer to send you information by email.
**The Legal Small Print** (Three Pages) ***START**THE SMALL PRINT!
**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START*** Why is this "Small Print!"
statement here?
You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our fault.
So, among other things, this "Small Print!"
statement disclaims most of our liability to you.
It also tells you how you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.
*BEFORE!
* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept this "Small Print!"
statement.
If you do not, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook by sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person you got it from.
If you received this eBook on a physical medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.
ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKS This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright on or for this work, so the Project (and you!)
can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties.
Special rules, set forth below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBook under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.
Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market any commercial products without permission.
To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerable efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain works.
Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any medium they may be on may contain "Defects".
Among other things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.
LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below, [1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.
If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that time to the person you received it from.
If you received it on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement copy.
If you received it electronically, such person may choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to receive it electronically.
THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".
NO OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you may have other legal rights.
INDEMNITY You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation, and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook, [2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook, or [3] any Defect.
DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm" You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this "Small Print!"
and all other references to Project Gutenberg, or: [1]  Only give exact copies of it.
Among other things, this      requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the      eBook or this "small print!"
statement.
You may however,      if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable      binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,      including any form resulting from conversion by word      processing or hypertext software, but only so long as      *EITHER*:      [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and           does *not* contain characters other than those           intended by the author of the work, although tilde           (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may           be used to convey punctuation intended by the           author, and additional characters may be used to           indicate hypertext links; OR      [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at           no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent           form by the program that displays the eBook (as is           the case, for instance, with most word processors);           OR      [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at           no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the           eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC           or other equivalent proprietary form).
[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this      "Small Print!"
statement.
[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the      gross profits you derive calculated using the method you      already use to calculate your applicable taxes.
If you      don't derive profits, no royalty is due.
Royalties are      payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"      the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were      legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent      periodic) tax return.
Please contact us beforehand to      let us know your plans and to work out the details.
WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine readable form.
The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time, public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the: "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."
If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at: hart@pobox.com [Portions of this eBook's header and trailer may be reprinted only when distributed free of all fees.
Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 by Michael S. Hart.
Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be used in any sales of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials be they hardware or software or any other related product without express permission.]
*END THE SMALL PRINT!
FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END*
This translation is intended to supplement a work entitled “The Authoress of the Odyssey”, which I published in 1897.
I could not give the whole “Odyssey” in that book without making it unwieldy, I therefore epitomised my translation, which was already completed and which I now publish in full.
I shall not here argue the two main points dealt with in the work just mentioned; I have nothing either to add to, or to withdraw from, what I have there written.
The points in question are: (1) that the “Odyssey” was written entirely at, and drawn entirely from, the place now called Trapani on the West Coast of Sicily, alike as regards the Phaeacian and the Ithaca scenes; while the voyages of Ulysses, when once he is within easy reach of Sicily, solve themselves into a periplus of the island, practically from Trapani back to Trapani, via the Lipari islands, the Straits of Messina, and the island of Pantellaria.
(2) That the poem was entirely written by a very young woman, who lived at the place now called Trapani, and introduced herself into her work under the name of Nausicaa.
The main arguments on which I base the first of these somewhat startling contentions, have been prominently and repeatedly before the English and Italian public ever since they appeared (without rejoinder) in the “Athenaeum” for January 30 and February 20, 1892.
Both contentions were urged (also without rejoinder) in the Johnian “Eagle” for the Lent and October terms of the same year.
Nothing to which I should reply has reached me from any quarter, and knowing how anxiously I have endeavoured to learn the existence of any flaws in my argument, I begin to feel some confidence that, did such flaws exist, I should have heard, at any rate about some of them, before now.
Without, therefore, for a moment pretending to think that scholars generally acquiesce in my conclusions, I shall act as thinking them little likely so to gainsay me as that it will be incumbent upon me to reply, and shall confine myself to translating the “Odyssey” for English readers, with such notes as I think will be found useful.
Among these I would especially call attention to one on xxii.
465-473 which Lord Grimthorpe has kindly allowed me to make public.
I have repeated several of the illustrations used in “The Authoress of the Odyssey”, and have added two which I hope may bring the outer court of Ulysses’ house more vividly before the reader.
I should like to explain that the presence of a man and a dog in one illustration is accidental, and was not observed by me till I developed the negative.
In an appendix I have also reprinted the paragraphs explanatory of the plan of Ulysses’ house, together with the plan itself.
The reader is recommended to study this plan with some attention.
In the preface to my translation of the “Iliad” I have given my views as to the main principles by which a translator should be guided, and need not repeat them here, beyond pointing out that the initial liberty of translating poetry into prose involves the continual taking of more or less liberty throughout the translation; for much that is right in poetry is wrong in prose, and the exigencies of readable prose are the first things to be considered in a prose translation.
That the reader, however, may see how far I have departed from strict construe, I will print here Messrs. Butcher and Lang’s translation of the sixty lines or so of the “Odyssey.” Their translation runs: Tell me, Muse, of that man, so ready at need, who wandered far and wide, after he had sacked the sacred citadel of Troy, and many were the men whose towns he saw and whose mind he learnt, yea, and many the woes he suffered in his heart on the deep, striving to win his own life and the return of his company.
Nay, but even so he saved not his company, though he desired it sore.
For through the blindness of their own hearts they perished, fools, who devoured the oxen of Helios Hyperion: but the god took from them their day of returning.
Of these things, goddess, daughter of Zeus, whencesoever thou hast heard thereof, declare thou even unto us.
Now all the rest, as many as fled from sheer destruction, were at     home, and had escaped both war and sea, but Odysseus only, craving     for his wife and for his homeward path, the lady nymph Calypso     held, that fair goddess, in her hollow caves, longing to have him     for her lord.
But when now the year had come in the courses of the     seasons, wherein the gods had ordained that he should return home     to Ithaca, not even there was he quit of labours, not even among     his own; but all the gods had pity on him save Poseidon, who raged     continually against godlike Odysseus, till he came to his own     country.
Howbeit Poseidon had now departed for the distant     Ethiopians, the Ethiopians that are sundered in twain, the     uttermost of men, abiding some where Hyperion sinks and some where     he rises.
There he looked to receive his hecatomb of bulls and     rams, there he made merry sitting at the feast, but the other gods     were gathered in the halls of Olympian Zeus.
Then among them the     father of men and gods began to speak, for he bethought him in his     heart of noble Aegisthus, whom the son of Agamemnon, far-famed     Orestes, slew.
Thinking upon him he spake out among the Immortals:     ‘Lo you now, how vainly mortal men do blame the gods!
For of us     they say comes evil, whereas they even of themselves, through the     blindness of their own hearts, have sorrows beyond that which is     ordained.
Even as of late Aegisthus, beyond that which was     ordained, took to him the wedded wife of the son of Atreus, and     killed her lord on his return, and that with sheer doom before his     eyes, since we had warned him by the embassy of Hermes the     keen-sighted, the slayer of Argos, that he should neither kill the     man, nor woo his wife.
For the son of Atreus shall be avenged at     the hand of Orestes, so soon as he shall come to man’s estate and     long for his own country.
So spake Hermes, yet he prevailed not on     the heart of Aegisthus, for all his good will; but now hath he paid     one price for all.’     And the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, answered him, saying: ‘O father,     our father Cronides, throned in the highest; that man assuredly     lies in a death that is his due; so perish likewise all who work     such deeds!
But my heart is rent for wise Odysseus, the hapless     one, who far from his friends this long while suffereth affliction     in a sea-girt isle, where is the navel of the sea, a woodland isle,     and therein a goddess hath her habitation, the daughter of the     wizard Atlas, who knows the depths of every sea, and himself     upholds the tall pillars which keep earth and sky asunder.
His     daughter it is that holds the hapless man in sorrow: and ever with     soft and guileful tales she is wooing him to forgetfulness of     Ithaca.
But Odysseus yearning to see if it were but the smoke leap     upwards from his own land, hath a desire to die.
As for thee, thine     heart regardeth it not at all, Olympian!
What!
Did not Odysseus by     the ships of the Argives make thee free offering of sacrifice in     the wide Trojan land?
Wherefore wast thou then so wroth with him, O     Zeus?’ The “Odyssey” (as every one knows) abounds in passages borrowed from the “Iliad”; I had wished to print these in a slightly different type, with marginal references to the “Iliad,” and had marked them to this end in my MS.
I found, however, that the translation would be thus hopelessly scholasticised, and abandoned my intention.
I would nevertheless urge on those who have the management of our University presses, that they would render a great service to students if they would publish a Greek text of the “Odyssey” with the Iliadic passages printed in a different type, and with marginal references.
I have given the British Museum a copy of the “Odyssey” with the Iliadic passages underlined and referred to in MS.; I have also given an “Iliad” marked with all the Odyssean passages, and their references; but copies of both the “Iliad” and “Odyssey” so marked ought to be within easy reach of all students.
Any one who at the present day discusses the questions that have arisen round the “Iliad” since Wolf’s time, without keeping it well before his reader’s mind that the “Odyssey” was demonstrably written from one single neighbourhood, and hence (even though nothing else pointed to this conclusion) presumably by one person only—that it was written certainly before 750, and in all probability before 1000 B.C.—that the writer of this very early poem was demonstrably familiar with the “Iliad” as we now have it, borrowing as freely from those books whose genuineness has been most impugned, as from those which are admitted to be by Homer—any one who fails to keep these points before his readers, is hardly dealing equitably by them.
Any one on the other hand, who will mark his “Iliad” and his “Odyssey” from the copies in the British Museum above referred to, and who will draw the only inference that common sense can draw from the presence of so many identical passages in both poems, will, I believe, find no difficulty in assigning their proper value to a large number of books here and on the Continent that at present enjoy considerable reputations.
Furthermore, and this perhaps is an advantage better worth securing, he will find that many puzzles of the “Odyssey” cease to puzzle him on the discovery that they arise from over-saturation with the “Iliad.” Other difficulties will also disappear as soon as the development of the poem in the writer’s mind is understood.
I have dealt with this at some length in pp.
251-261 of “The Authoress of the Odyssey”.
Briefly, the “Odyssey” consists of two distinct poems: (1) The Return of Ulysses, which alone the Muse is asked to sing in the opening lines of the poem.
This poem includes the Phaeacian episode, and the account of Ulysses’ adventures as told by himself in Books ix.-xii.
It consists of lines 1-79 (roughly) of Book i., of line 28 of Book v., and thence without intermission to the middle of line 187 of Book xiii., at which point the original scheme was abandoned.
(2) The story of Penelope and the suitors, with the episode of Telemachus’ voyage to Pylos.
This poem begins with line 80 (roughly) of Book i., is continued to the end of Book iv., and not resumed till Ulysses wakes in the middle of line 187, Book xiii., from whence it continues to the end of Book xxiv.
In “The Authoress of the Odyssey”, I wrote: the introduction of lines xi., 115-137 and of line ix., 535, with the writing a new council of the gods at the beginning of Book v., to take the place of the one that was removed to Book i., 1-79, were the only things that were done to give even a semblance of unity to the old scheme and the new, and to conceal the fact that the Muse, after being asked to sing of one subject, spend two-thirds of her time in singing a very different one, with a climax for which no-one has asked her.
For roughly the Return occupies eight Books, and Penelope and the Suitors sixteen.
I believe this to be substantially correct.
Lastly, to deal with a very unimportant point, I observe that the Leipsic Teubner edition of 894 makes Books ii.
and iii.
end with a comma.
Stops are things of such far more recent date than the “Odyssey,” that there does not seem much use in adhering to the text in so small a matter; still, from a spirit of mere conservatism, I have preferred to do so.
Why [Greek] at the beginnings of Books ii.
and viii., and [Greek], at the beginning of Book vii.
should have initial capitals in an edition far too careful to admit a supposition of inadvertence, when [Greek] at the beginning of Books vi.
and xiii., and [Greek] at the beginning of Book xvii.
have no initial capitals, I cannot determine.
No other Books of the “Odyssey” have initial capitals except the three mentioned unless the first word of the Book is a proper name.
S. BUTLER.
_July_ 25, 1900.
PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION Butler’s Translation of the “Odyssey” appeared originally in 1900, and The Authoress of the Odyssey in 1897.
In the preface to the new edition of “The Authoress”, which is published simultaneously with this new edition of the Translation, I have given some account of the genesis of the two books.
The size of the original page has been reduced so as to make both books uniform with Butler’s other works; and, fortunately, it has been possible, by using a smaller type, to get the same number of words into each page, so that the references remain good, and, with the exception of a few minor alterations and rearrangements now to be enumerated so far as they affect the Translation, the new editions are faithful reprints of the original editions, with misprints and obvious errors corrected—no attempt having been made to edit them or to bring them up to date.
(a) The Index has been revised.
(b) Owing to the reduction in the size of the page it has been necessary to shorten some of the headlines, and here advantage has been taken of various corrections of and additions to the headlines and shoulder-notes made by Butler in his own copies of the two books.
(c) For the most part each of the illustrations now occupies a page, whereas in the original editions they generally appeared two on the page.
It has been necessary to reduce the plan of the House of Ulysses.
On page 153 of “The Authoress” Butler says: “No great poet would compare his hero to a paunch full of blood and fat, cooking before the fire (xx, 24-28).” This passage is not given in the abridged Story of the “Odyssey” at the beginning of the book, but in the Translation it occurs in these words: “Thus he chided with his heart, and checked it into endurance, but he tossed about as one who turns a paunch full of blood and fat in front of a hot fire, doing it first on one side then on the other, that he may get it cooked as soon as possible; even so did he turn himself about from side to side, thinking all the time how, single-handed as he was, he should contrive to kill so large a body of men as the wicked suitors.” It looks as though in the interval between the publication of “The Authoress” (1897) and of the Translation (1900) Butler had changed his mind; for in the first case the comparison is between Ulysses and a paunch full, etc., and in the second it is between Ulysses and a man who turns a paunch full, etc.
The second comparison is perhaps one which a great poet might make.
In seeing the works through the press I have had the invaluable assistance of Mr. A. T. Bartholomew of the University Library, Cambridge, and of Mr. Donald S. Robertson, Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge.
To both these friends I give my most cordial thanks for the care and skill exercised by them.
Mr. Robertson has found time for the labour of checking and correcting all the quotations from and references to the “Iliad” and “Odyssey,” and I believe that it could not have been better performed.
It was, I know, a pleasure for him; and it would have been a pleasure also for Butler if he could have known that his work was being shepherded by the son of his old friend, Mr. H. R. Robertson, who more than half a century ago was a fellow-student with him at Cary’s School of Art in Streatham Street, Bloomsbury.
HENRY FESTING JONES.
120 MAIDA VALE, W.9.
4th _December_, 1921.
THE ODYSSEY BOOK I THE GODS IN COUNCIL—MINERVA’S VISIT TO ITHACA—THE CHALLENGE FROM TELEMACHUS TO THE SUITORS.
Tell me, O Muse, of that ingenious hero who travelled far and wide after he had sacked the famous town of Troy.
Many cities did he visit, and many were the nations with whose manners and customs he was acquainted; moreover he suffered much by sea while trying to save his own life and bring his men safely home; but do what he might he could not save his men, for they perished through their own sheer folly in eating the cattle of the Sun-god Hyperion; so the god prevented them from ever reaching home.
Tell me, too, about all these things, oh daughter of Jove, from whatsoever source you may know them.
So now all who escaped death in battle or by shipwreck had got safely home except Ulysses, and he, though he was longing to return to his wife and country, was detained by the goddess Calypso, who had got him into a large cave and wanted to marry him.
But as years went by, there came a time when the gods settled that he should go back to Ithaca; even then, however, when he was among his own people, his troubles were not yet over; nevertheless all the gods had now begun to pity him except Neptune, who still persecuted him without ceasing and would not let him get home.
Now Neptune had gone off to the Ethiopians, who are at the world’s end, and lie in two halves, the one looking West and the other East.1 He had gone there to accept a hecatomb of sheep and oxen, and was enjoying himself at his festival; but the other gods met in the house of Olympian Jove, and the sire of gods and men spoke first.
At that moment he was thinking of Aegisthus, who had been killed by Agamemnon’s son Orestes; so he said to the other gods: “See now, how men lay blame upon us gods for what is after all nothing but their own folly.
Look at Aegisthus; he must needs make love to Agamemnon’s wife unrighteously and then kill Agamemnon, though he knew it would be the death of him; for I sent Mercury to warn him not to do either of these things, inasmuch as Orestes would be sure to take his revenge when he grew up and wanted to return home.
Mercury told him this in all good will but he would not listen, and now he has paid for everything in full.” Then Minerva said, “Father, son of Saturn, King of kings, it served Aegisthus right, and so it would any one else who does as he did; but Aegisthus is neither here nor there; it is for Ulysses that my heart bleeds, when I think of his sufferings in that lonely sea-girt island, far away, poor man, from all his friends.
It is an island covered with forest, in the very middle of the sea, and a goddess lives there, daughter of the magician Atlas, who looks after the bottom of the ocean, and carries the great columns that keep heaven and earth asunder.
This daughter of Atlas has got hold of poor unhappy Ulysses, and keeps trying by every kind of blandishment to make him forget his home, so that he is tired of life, and thinks of nothing but how he may once more see the smoke of his own chimneys.
You, sir, take no heed of this, and yet when Ulysses was before Troy did he not propitiate you with many a burnt sacrifice?
Why then should you keep on being so angry with him?” And Jove said, “My child, what are you talking about?
How can I forget Ulysses than whom there is no more capable man on earth, nor more liberal in his offerings to the immortal gods that live in heaven?
Bear in mind, however, that Neptune is still furious with Ulysses for having blinded an eye of Polyphemus king of the Cyclopes.
Polyphemus is son to Neptune by the nymph Thoosa, daughter to the sea-king Phorcys; therefore though he will not kill Ulysses outright, he torments him by preventing him from getting home.
Still, let us lay our heads together and see how we can help him to return; Neptune will then be pacified, for if we are all of a mind he can hardly stand out against us.” And Minerva said, “Father, son of Saturn, King of kings, if, then, the gods now mean that Ulysses should get home, we should first send Mercury to the Ogygian island to tell Calypso that we have made up our minds and that he is to return.
In the meantime I will go to Ithaca, to put heart into Ulysses’ son Telemachus; I will embolden him to call the Achaeans in assembly, and speak out to the suitors of his mother Penelope, who persist in eating up any number of his sheep and oxen; I will also conduct him to Sparta and to Pylos, to see if he can hear anything about the return of his dear father—for this will make people speak well of him.” So saying she bound on her glittering golden sandals, imperishable, with which she can fly like the wind over land or sea; she grasped the redoubtable bronze-shod spear, so stout and sturdy and strong, wherewith she quells the ranks of heroes who have displeased her, and down she darted from the topmost summits of Olympus, whereon forthwith she was in Ithaca, at the gateway of Ulysses’ house, disguised as a visitor, Mentes, chief of the Taphians, and she held a bronze spear in her hand.
There she found the lordly suitors seated on hides of the oxen which they had killed and eaten, and playing draughts in front of the house.
Men-servants and pages were bustling about to wait upon them, some mixing wine with water in the mixing-bowls, some cleaning down the tables with wet sponges and laying them out again, and some cutting up great quantities of meat.
Telemachus saw her long before any one else did.
He was sitting moodily among the suitors thinking about his brave father, and how he would send them flying out of the house, if he were to come to his own again and be honoured as in days gone by.
Thus brooding as he sat among them, he caught sight of Minerva and went straight to the gate, for he was vexed that a stranger should be kept waiting for admittance.
He took her right hand in his own, and bade her give him her spear.
“Welcome,” said he, “to our house, and when you have partaken of food you shall tell us what you have come for.” He led the way as he spoke, and Minerva followed him.
When they were within he took her spear and set it in the spear-stand against a strong bearing-post along with the many other spears of his unhappy father, and he conducted her to a richly decorated seat under which he threw a cloth of damask.
There was a footstool also for her feet,2 and he set another seat near her for himself, away from the suitors, that she might not be annoyed while eating by their noise and insolence, and that he might ask her more freely about his father.
A maid servant then brought them water in a beautiful golden ewer and poured it into a silver basin for them to wash their hands, and she drew a clean table beside them.
An upper servant brought them bread, and offered them many good things of what there was in the house, the carver fetched them plates of all manner of meats and set cups of gold by their side, and a manservant brought them wine and poured it out for them.
Then the suitors came in and took their places on the benches and seats.3 Forthwith men servants poured water over their hands, maids went round with the bread-baskets, pages filled the mixing-bowls with wine and water, and they laid their hands upon the good things that were before them.
As soon as they had had enough to eat and drink they wanted music and dancing, which are the crowning embellishments of a banquet, so a servant brought a lyre to Phemius, whom they compelled perforce to sing to them.
As soon as he touched his lyre and began to sing Telemachus spoke low to Minerva, with his head close to hers that no man might hear.
“I hope, sir,” said he, “that you will not be offended with what I am going to say.
Singing comes cheap to those who do not pay for it, and all this is done at the cost of one whose bones lie rotting in some wilderness or grinding to powder in the surf.
If these men were to see my father come back to Ithaca they would pray for longer legs rather than a longer purse, for money would not serve them; but he, alas, has fallen on an ill fate, and even when people do sometimes say that he is coming, we no longer heed them; we shall never see him again.
And now, sir, tell me and tell me true, who you are and where you come from.
Tell me of your town and parents, what manner of ship you came in, how your crew brought you to Ithaca, and of what nation they declared themselves to be—for you cannot have come by land.
Tell me also truly, for I want to know, are you a stranger to this house, or have you been here in my father’s time?
In the old days we had many visitors for my father went about much himself.” And Minerva answered, “I will tell you truly and particularly all about it.
I am Mentes, son of Anchialus, and I am King of the Taphians.
I have come here with my ship and crew, on a voyage to men of a foreign tongue being bound for Temesa4 with a cargo of iron, and I shall bring back copper.
As for my ship, it lies over yonder off the open country away from the town, in the harbour Rheithron5 under the wooded mountain Neritum.6 Our fathers were friends before us, as old Laertes will tell you, if you will go and ask him.
They say, however, that he never comes to town now, and lives by himself in the country, faring hardly, with an old woman to look after him and get his dinner for him, when he comes in tired from pottering about his vineyard.
They told me your father was at home again, and that was why I came, but it seems the gods are still keeping him back, for he is not dead yet not on the mainland.
It is more likely he is on some sea-girt island in mid ocean, or a prisoner among savages who are detaining him against his will.
I am no prophet, and know very little about omens, but I speak as it is borne in upon me from heaven, and assure you that he will not be away much longer; for he is a man of such resource that even though he were in chains of iron he would find some means of getting home again.
But tell me, and tell me true, can Ulysses really have such a fine looking fellow for a son?
You are indeed wonderfully like him about the head and eyes, for we were close friends before he set sail for Troy where the flower of all the Argives went also.
Since that time we have never either of us seen the other.” “My mother,” answered Telemachus, “tells me I am son to Ulysses, but it is a wise child that knows his own father.
Would that I were son to one who had grown old upon his own estates, for, since you ask me, there is no more ill-starred man under heaven than he who they tell me is my father.” And Minerva said, “There is no fear of your race dying out yet, while Penelope has such a fine son as you are.
But tell me, and tell me true, what is the meaning of all this feasting, and who are these people?
What is it all about?
Have you some banquet, or is there a wedding in the family—for no one seems to be bringing any provisions of his own?
And the guests—how atrociously they are behaving; what riot they make over the whole house; it is enough to disgust any respectable person who comes near them.” “Sir,” said Telemachus, “as regards your question, so long as my father was here it was well with us and with the house, but the gods in their displeasure have willed it otherwise, and have hidden him away more closely than mortal man was ever yet hidden.
I could have borne it better even though he were dead, if he had fallen with his men before Troy, or had died with friends around him when the days of his fighting were done; for then the Achaeans would have built a mound over his ashes, and I should myself have been heir to his renown; but now the storm-winds have spirited him away we know not whither; he is gone without leaving so much as a trace behind him, and I inherit nothing but dismay.
Nor does the matter end simply with grief for the loss of my father; heaven has laid sorrows upon me of yet another kind; for the chiefs from all our islands, Dulichium, Same, and the woodland island of Zacynthus, as also all the principal men of Ithaca itself, are eating up my house under the pretext of paying their court to my mother, who will neither point blank say that she will not marry,7 nor yet bring matters to an end; so they are making havoc of my estate, and before long will do so also with myself.” “Is that so?” exclaimed Minerva, “then you do indeed want Ulysses home again.
Give him his helmet, shield, and a couple of lances, and if he is the man he was when I first knew him in our house, drinking and making merry, he would soon lay his hands about these rascally suitors, were he to stand once more upon his own threshold.
He was then coming from Ephyra, where he had been to beg poison for his arrows from Ilus, son of Mermerus.
Ilus feared the ever-living gods and would not give him any, but my father let him have some, for he was very fond of him.
If Ulysses is the man he then was these suitors will have a short shrift and a sorry wedding.
“But there!
It rests with heaven to determine whether he is to return, and take his revenge in his own house or no; I would, however, urge you to set about trying to get rid of these suitors at once.
Take my advice, call the Achaean heroes in assembly to-morrow morning—lay your case before them, and call heaven to bear you witness.
Bid the suitors take themselves off, each to his own place, and if your mother’s mind is set on marrying again, let her go back to her father, who will find her a husband and provide her with all the marriage gifts that so dear a daughter may expect.
As for yourself, let me prevail upon you to take the best ship you can get, with a crew of twenty men, and go in quest of your father who has so long been missing.
Some one may tell you something, or (and people often hear things in this way) some heaven-sent message may direct you.
First go to Pylos and ask Nestor; thence go on to Sparta and visit Menelaus, for he got home last of all the Achaeans; if you hear that your father is alive and on his way home, you can put up with the waste these suitors will make for yet another twelve months.
If on the other hand you hear of his death, come home at once, celebrate his funeral rites with all due pomp, build a barrow to his memory, and make your mother marry again.
Then, having done all this, think it well over in your mind how, by fair means or foul, you may kill these suitors in your own house.
You are too old to plead infancy any longer; have you not heard how people are singing Orestes’ praises for having killed his father’s murderer Aegisthus?
You are a fine, smart looking fellow; show your mettle, then, and make yourself a name in story.
Now, however, I must go back to my ship and to my crew, who will be impatient if I keep them waiting longer; think the matter over for yourself, and remember what I have said to you.” “Sir,” answered Telemachus, “it has been very kind of you to talk to me in this way, as though I were your own son, and I will do all you tell me; I know you want to be getting on with your voyage, but stay a little longer till you have taken a bath and refreshed yourself.
I will then give you a present, and you shall go on your way rejoicing; I will give you one of great beauty and value—a keepsake such as only dear friends give to one another.” Minerva answered, “Do not try to keep me, for I would be on my way at once.
As for any present you may be disposed to make me, keep it till I come again, and I will take it home with me.
You shall give me a very good one, and I will give you one of no less value in return.” With these words she flew away like a bird into the air, but she had given Telemachus courage, and had made him think more than ever about his father.
He felt the change, wondered at it, and knew that the stranger had been a god, so he went straight to where the suitors were sitting.
Phemius was still singing, and his hearers sat rapt in silence as he told the sad tale of the return from Troy, and the ills Minerva had laid upon the Achaeans.
Penelope, daughter of Icarius, heard his song from her room upstairs, and came down by the great staircase, not alone, but attended by two of her handmaids.
When she reached the suitors she stood by one of the bearing posts that supported the roof of the cloisters8 with a staid maiden on either side of her.
She held a veil, moreover, before her face, and was weeping bitterly.
“Phemius,” she cried, “you know many another feat of gods and heroes, such as poets love to celebrate.
Sing the suitors some one of these, and let them drink their wine in silence, but cease this sad tale, for it breaks my sorrowful heart, and reminds me of my lost husband whom I mourn ever without ceasing, and whose name was great over all Hellas and middle Argos.”9 “Mother,” answered Telemachus, “let the bard sing what he has a mind to; bards do not make the ills they sing of; it is Jove, not they, who makes them, and who sends weal or woe upon mankind according to his own good pleasure.
This fellow means no harm by singing the ill-fated return of the Danaans, for people always applaud the latest songs most warmly.
Make up your mind to it and bear it; Ulysses is not the only man who never came back from Troy, but many another went down as well as he.
Go, then, within the house and busy yourself with your daily duties, your loom, your distaff, and the ordering of your servants; for speech is man’s matter, and mine above all others 10—for it is I who am master here.” She went wondering back into the house, and laid her son’s saying in her heart.
Then, going upstairs with her handmaids into her room, she mourned her dear husband till Minerva shed sweet sleep over her eyes.
But the suitors were clamorous throughout the covered cloisters11, and prayed each one that he might be her bed fellow.
Then Telemachus spoke, “Shameless,” he cried, “and insolent suitors, let us feast at our pleasure now, and let there be no brawling, for it is a rare thing to hear a man with such a divine voice as Phemius has; but in the morning meet me in full assembly that I may give you formal notice to depart, and feast at one another’s houses, turn and turn about, at your own cost.
If on the other hand you choose to persist in spunging upon one man, heaven help me, but Jove shall reckon with you in full, and when you fall in my father’s house there shall be no man to avenge you.” The suitors bit their lips as they heard him, and marvelled at the boldness of his speech.
Then, Antinous, son of Eupeithes, said, “The gods seem to have given you lessons in bluster and tall talking; may Jove never grant you to be chief in Ithaca as your father was before you.” Telemachus answered, “Antinous, do not chide with me, but, god willing, I will be chief too if I can.
Is this the worst fate you can think of for me?
It is no bad thing to be a chief, for it brings both riches and honour.
Still, now that Ulysses is dead there are many great men in Ithaca both old and young, and some other may take the lead among them; nevertheless I will be chief in my own house, and will rule those whom Ulysses has won for me.” Then Eurymachus, son of Polybus, answered, “It rests with heaven to decide who shall be chief among us, but you shall be master in your own house and over your own possessions; no one while there is a man in Ithaca shall do you violence nor rob you.
And now, my good fellow, I want to know about this stranger.
What country does he come from?
Of what family is he, and where is his estate?
Has he brought you news about the return of your father, or was he on business of his own?
He seemed a well to do man, but he hurried off so suddenly that he was gone in a moment before we could get to know him.” “My father is dead and gone,” answered Telemachus, “and even if some rumour reaches me I put no more faith in it now.
My mother does indeed sometimes send for a soothsayer and question him, but I give his prophecyings no heed.
As for the stranger, he was Mentes, son of Anchialus, chief of the Taphians, an old friend of my father’s.” But in his heart he knew that it had been the goddess.
The suitors then returned to their singing and dancing until the evening; but when night fell upon their pleasuring they went home to bed each in his own abode.12 Telemachus’s room was high up in a tower13 that looked on to the outer court; hither, then, he hied, brooding and full of thought.
A good old woman, Euryclea, daughter of Ops, the son of Pisenor, went before him with a couple of blazing torches.
Laertes had bought her with his own money when she was quite young; he gave the worth of twenty oxen for her, and shewed as much respect to her in his household as he did to his own wedded wife, but he did not take her to his bed for he feared his wife’s resentment.14 She it was who now lighted Telemachus to his room, and she loved him better than any of the other women in the house did, for she had nursed him when he was a baby.
He opened the door of his bed room and sat down upon the bed; as he took off his shirt15 he gave it to the good old woman, who folded it tidily up, and hung it for him over a peg by his bed side, after which she went out, pulled the door to by a silver catch, and drew the bolt home by means of the strap.16 But Telemachus as he lay covered with a woollen fleece kept thinking all night through of his intended voyage and of the counsel that Minerva had given him.
BOOK II ASSEMBLY OF THE PEOPLE OF ITHACA—SPEECHES OF TELEMACHUS AND OF THE SUITORS—TELEMACHUS MAKES HIS PREPARATIONS AND STARTS FOR PYLOS WITH MINERVA DISGUISED AS MENTOR.
Now when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared Telemachus rose and dressed himself.
He bound his sandals on to his comely feet, girded his sword about his shoulder, and left his room looking like an immortal god.
He at once sent the criers round to call the people in assembly, so they called them and the people gathered thereon; then, when they were got together, he went to the place of assembly spear in hand—not alone, for his two hounds went with him.
Minerva endowed him with a presence of such divine comeliness that all marvelled at him as he went by, and when he took his place in his father’s seat even the oldest councillors made way for him.
Aegyptius, a man bent double with age, and of infinite experience, was the first to speak.
His son Antiphus had gone with Ulysses to Ilius, land of noble steeds, but the savage Cyclops had killed him when they were all shut up in the cave, and had cooked his last dinner for him.17 He had three sons left, of whom two still worked on their father’s land, while the third, Eurynomus, was one of the suitors; nevertheless their father could not get over the loss of Antiphus, and was still weeping for him when he began his speech.
“Men of Ithaca,” he said, “hear my words.
From the day Ulysses left us there has been no meeting of our councillors until now; who then can it be, whether old or young, that finds it so necessary to convene us?
Has he got wind of some host approaching, and does he wish to warn us, or would he speak upon some other matter of public moment?
I am sure he is an excellent person, and I hope Jove will grant him his heart’s desire.” Telemachus took this speech as of good omen and rose at once, for he was bursting with what he had to say.
He stood in the middle of the assembly and the good herald Pisenor brought him his staff.
Then, turning to Aegyptius, “Sir,” said he, “it is I, as you will shortly learn, who have convened you, for it is I who am the most aggrieved.
I have not got wind of any host approaching about which I would warn you, nor is there any matter of public moment on which I would speak.
My grievance is purely personal, and turns on two great misfortunes which have fallen upon my house.
The first of these is the loss of my excellent father, who was chief among all you here present, and was like a father to every one of you; the second is much more serious, and ere long will be the utter ruin of my estate.
The sons of all the chief men among you are pestering my mother to marry them against her will.
They are afraid to go to her father Icarius, asking him to choose the one he likes best, and to provide marriage gifts for his daughter, but day by day they keep hanging about my father’s house, sacrificing our oxen, sheep, and fat goats for their banquets, and never giving so much as a thought to the quantity of wine they drink.
No estate can stand such recklessness; we have now no Ulysses to ward off harm from our doors, and I cannot hold my own against them.
I shall never all my days be as good a man as he was, still I would indeed defend myself if I had power to do so, for I cannot stand such treatment any longer; my house is being disgraced and ruined.
Have respect, therefore, to your own consciences and to public opinion.
Fear, too, the wrath of heaven, lest the gods should be displeased and turn upon you.
I pray you by Jove and Themis, who is the beginning and the end of councils, [do not] hold back, my friends, and leave me singlehanded18—unless it be that my brave father Ulysses did some wrong to the Achaeans which you would now avenge on me, by aiding and abetting these suitors.
Moreover, if I am to be eaten out of house and home at all, I had rather you did the eating yourselves, for I could then take action against you to some purpose, and serve you with notices from house to house till I got paid in full, whereas now I have no remedy.”19 With this Telemachus dashed his staff to the ground and burst into tears.
Every one was very sorry for him, but they all sat still and no one ventured to make him an angry answer, save only Antinous, who spoke thus: “Telemachus, insolent braggart that you are, how dare you try to throw the blame upon us suitors?
It is your mother’s fault not ours, for she is a very artful woman.
This three years past, and close on four, she had been driving us out of our minds, by encouraging each one of us, and sending him messages without meaning one word of what she says.
And then there was that other trick she played us.
She set up a great tambour frame in her room, and began to work on an enormous piece of fine needlework.
‘Sweet hearts,’ said she, ‘Ulysses is indeed dead, still do not press me to marry again immediately, wait—for I would not have skill in needlework perish unrecorded—till I have completed a pall for the hero Laertes, to be in readiness against the time when death shall take him.
He is very rich, and the women of the place will talk if he is laid out without a pall.’ “This was what she said, and we assented; whereon we could see her working on her great web all day long, but at night she would unpick the stitches again by torchlight.
She fooled us in this way for three years and we never found her out, but as time wore on and she was now in her fourth year, one of her maids who knew what she was doing told us, and we caught her in the act of undoing her work, so she had to finish it whether she would or no.
The suitors, therefore, make you this answer, that both you and the Achaeans may understand—‘Send your mother away, and bid her marry the man of her own and of her father’s choice’; for I do not know what will happen if she goes on plaguing us much longer with the airs she gives herself on the score of the accomplishments Minerva has taught her, and because she is so clever.
We never yet heard of such a woman; we know all about Tyro, Alcmena, Mycene, and the famous women of old, but they were nothing to your mother any one of them.
It was not fair of her to treat us in that way, and as long as she continues in the mind with which heaven has now endowed her, so long shall we go on eating up your estate; and I do not see why she should change, for she gets all the honour and glory, and it is you who pay for it, not she.
Understand, then, that we will not go back to our lands, neither here nor elsewhere, till she has made her choice and married some one or other of us.” Telemachus answered, “Antinous, how can I drive the mother who bore me from my father’s house?
My father is abroad and we do not know whether he is alive or dead.
It will be hard on me if I have to pay Icarius the large sum which I must give him if I insist on sending his daughter back to him.
Not only will he deal rigorously with me, but heaven will also punish me; for my mother when she leaves the house will call on the Erinyes to avenge her; besides, it would not be a creditable thing to do, and I will have nothing to say to it.
If you choose to take offence at this, leave the house and feast elsewhere at one another’s houses at your own cost turn and turn about.
If, on the other hand, you elect to persist in spunging upon one man, heaven help me, but Jove shall reckon with you in full, and when you fall in my father’s house there shall be no man to avenge you.” As he spoke Jove sent two eagles from the top of the mountain, and they flew on and on with the wind, sailing side by side in their own lordly flight.
When they were right over the middle of the assembly they wheeled and circled about, beating the air with their wings and glaring death into the eyes of them that were below; then, fighting fiercely and tearing at one another, they flew off towards the right over the town.
The people wondered as they saw them, and asked each other what all this might be; whereon Halitherses, who was the best prophet and reader of omens among them, spoke to them plainly and in all honesty, saying: “Hear me, men of Ithaca, and I speak more particularly to the suitors, for I see mischief brewing for them.
Ulysses is not going to be away much longer; indeed he is close at hand to deal out death and destruction, not on them alone, but on many another of us who live in Ithaca.
Let us then be wise in time, and put a stop to this wickedness before he comes.
Let the suitors do so of their own accord; it will be better for them, for I am not prophesying without due knowledge; everything has happened to Ulysses as I foretold when the Argives set out for Troy, and he with them.
I said that after going through much hardship and losing all his men he should come home again in the twentieth year and that no one would know him; and now all this is coming true.” Eurymachus son of Polybus then said, “Go home, old man, and prophesy to your own children, or it may be worse for them.
I can read these omens myself much better than you can; birds are always flying about in the sunshine somewhere or other, but they seldom mean anything.
Ulysses has died in a far country, and it is a pity you are not dead along with him, instead of prating here about omens and adding fuel to the anger of Telemachus which is fierce enough as it is.
I suppose you think he will give you something for your family, but I tell you—and it shall surely be—when an old man like you, who should know better, talks a young one over till he becomes troublesome, in the first place his young friend will only fare so much the worse—he will take nothing by it, for the suitors will prevent this—and in the next, we will lay a heavier fine, sir, upon yourself than you will at all like paying, for it will bear hardly upon you.
As for Telemachus, I warn him in the presence of you all to send his mother back to her father, who will find her a husband and provide her with all the marriage gifts so dear a daughter may expect.
Till then we shall go on harassing him with our suit; for we fear no man, and care neither for him, with all his fine speeches, nor for any fortune-telling of yours.
You may preach as much as you please, but we shall only hate you the more.
We shall go back and continue to eat up Telemachus’s estate without paying him, till such time as his mother leaves off tormenting us by keeping us day after day on the tiptoe of expectation, each vying with the other in his suit for a prize of such rare perfection.
Besides we cannot go after the other women whom we should marry in due course, but for the way in which she treats us.” Then Telemachus said, “Eurymachus, and you other suitors, I shall say no more, and entreat you no further, for the gods and the people of Ithaca now know my story.
Give me, then, a ship and a crew of twenty men to take me hither and thither, and I will go to Sparta and to Pylos in quest of my father who has so long been missing.
Some one may tell me something, or (and people often hear things in this way) some heaven-sent message may direct me.
If I can hear of him as alive and on his way home I will put up with the waste you suitors will make for yet another twelve months.
If on the other hand I hear of his death, I will return at once, celebrate his funeral rites with all due pomp, build a barrow to his memory, and make my mother marry again.” With these words he sat down, and Mentor20 who had been a friend of Ulysses, and had been left in charge of everything with full authority over the servants, rose to speak.
He, then, plainly and in all honesty addressed them thus: “Hear me, men of Ithaca, I hope that you may never have a kind and well-disposed ruler any more, nor one who will govern you equitably; I hope that all your chiefs henceforward may be cruel and unjust, for there is not one of you but has forgotten Ulysses, who ruled you as though he were your father.
I am not half so angry with the suitors, for if they choose to do violence in the naughtiness of their hearts, and wager their heads that Ulysses will not return, they can take the high hand and eat up his estate, but as for you others I am shocked at the way in which you all sit still without even trying to stop such scandalous goings on—which you could do if you chose, for you are many and they are few.” Leiocritus, son of Evenor, answered him saying, “Mentor, what folly is all this, that you should set the people to stay us?
It is a hard thing for one man to fight with many about his victuals.
Even though Ulysses himself were to set upon us while we are feasting in his house, and do his best to oust us, his wife, who wants him back so very badly, would have small cause for rejoicing, and his blood would be upon his own head if he fought against such great odds.
There is no sense in what you have been saying.
Now, therefore, do you people go about your business, and let his father’s old friends, Mentor and Halitherses, speed this boy on his journey, if he goes at all—which I do not think he will, for he is more likely to stay where he is till some one comes and tells him something.” On this he broke up the assembly, and every man went back to his own abode, while the suitors returned to the house of Ulysses.
Then Telemachus went all alone by the sea side, washed his hands in the grey waves, and prayed to Minerva.
“Hear me,” he cried, “you god who visited me yesterday, and bade me sail the seas in search of my father who has so long been missing.
I would obey you, but the Achaeans, and more particularly the wicked suitors, are hindering me that I cannot do so.” As he thus prayed, Minerva came close up to him in the likeness and with the voice of Mentor.
“Telemachus,” said she, “if you are made of the same stuff as your father you will be neither fool nor coward henceforward, for Ulysses never broke his word nor left his work half done.
If, then, you take after him, your voyage will not be fruitless, but unless you have the blood of Ulysses and of Penelope in your veins I see no likelihood of your succeeding.
Sons are seldom as good men as their fathers; they are generally worse, not better; still, as you are not going to be either fool or coward henceforward, and are not entirely without some share of your father’s wise discernment, I look with hope upon your undertaking.
But mind you never make common cause with any of those foolish suitors, for they have neither sense nor virtue, and give no thought to death and to the doom that will shortly fall on one and all of them, so that they shall perish on the same day.
As for your voyage, it shall not be long delayed; your father was such an old friend of mine that I will find you a ship, and will come with you myself.
Now, however, return home, and go about among the suitors; begin getting provisions ready for your voyage; see everything well stowed, the wine in jars, and the barley meal, which is the staff of life, in leathern bags, while I go round the town and beat up volunteers at once.
There are many ships in Ithaca both old and new; I will run my eye over them for you and will choose the best; we will get her ready and will put out to sea without delay.” Thus spoke Minerva daughter of Jove, and Telemachus lost no time in doing as the goddess told him.
He went moodily home, and found the suitors flaying goats and singeing pigs in the outer court.
Antinous came up to him at once and laughed as he took his hand in his own, saying, “Telemachus, my fine fire-eater, bear no more ill blood neither in word nor deed, but eat and drink with us as you used to do.
The Achaeans will find you in everything—a ship and a picked crew to boot—so that you can set sail for Pylos at once and get news of your noble father.” “Antinous,” answered Telemachus, “I cannot eat in peace, nor take pleasure of any kind with such men as you are.
Was it not enough that you should waste so much good property of mine while I was yet a boy?
Now that I am older and know more about it, I am also stronger, and whether here among this people, or by going to Pylos, I will do you all the harm I can.
I shall go, and my going will not be in vain—though, thanks to you suitors, I have neither ship nor crew of my own, and must be passenger not captain.” As he spoke he snatched his hand from that of Antinous.
Meanwhile the others went on getting dinner ready about the buildings,21 jeering at him tauntingly as they did so.
“Telemachus,” said one youngster, “means to be the death of us; I suppose he thinks he can bring friends to help him from Pylos, or again from Sparta, where he seems bent on going.
Or will he go to Ephyra as well, for poison to put in our wine and kill us?” Another said, “Perhaps if Telemachus goes on board ship, he will be like his father and perish far from his friends.
In this case we should have plenty to do, for we could then divide up his property amongst us: as for the house we can let his mother and the man who marries her have that.” This was how they talked.
But Telemachus went down into the lofty and spacious store-room where his father’s treasure of gold and bronze lay heaped up upon the floor, and where the linen and spare clothes were kept in open chests.
Here, too, there was a store of fragrant olive oil, while casks of old, well-ripened wine, unblended and fit for a god to drink, were ranged against the wall in case Ulysses should come home again after all.
The room was closed with well-made doors opening in the middle; moreover the faithful old house-keeper Euryclea, daughter of Ops the son of Pisenor, was in charge of everything both night and day.
Telemachus called her to the store-room and said: “Nurse, draw me off some of the best wine you have, after what you are keeping for my father’s own drinking, in case, poor man, he should escape death, and find his way home again after all.
Let me have twelve jars, and see that they all have lids; also fill me some well-sewn leathern bags with barley meal—about twenty measures in all.
Get these things put together at once, and say nothing about it.
I will take everything away this evening as soon as my mother has gone upstairs for the night.
I am going to Sparta and to Pylos to see if I can hear anything about the return of my dear father.” When Euryclea heard this she began to cry, and spoke fondly to him, saying, “My dear child, what ever can have put such notion as that into your head?
Where in the world do you want to go to—you, who are the one hope of the house?
Your poor father is dead and gone in some foreign country nobody knows where, and as soon as your back is turned these wicked ones here will be scheming to get you put out of the way, and will share all your possessions among themselves; stay where you are among your own people, and do not go wandering and worrying your life out on the barren ocean.” “Fear not, nurse,” answered Telemachus, “my scheme is not without heaven’s sanction; but swear that you will say nothing about all this to my mother, till I have been away some ten or twelve days, unless she hears of my having gone, and asks you; for I do not want her to spoil her beauty by crying.” The old woman swore most solemnly that she would not, and when she had completed her oath, she began drawing off the wine into jars, and getting the barley meal into the bags, while Telemachus went back to the suitors.
Then Minerva bethought her of another matter.
She took his shape, and went round the town to each one of the crew, telling them to meet at the ship by sundown.
She went also to Noemon son of Phronius, and asked him to let her have a ship—which he was very ready to do.
When the sun had set and darkness was over all the land, she got the ship into the water, put all the tackle on board her that ships generally carry, and stationed her at the end of the harbour.
Presently the crew came up, and the goddess spoke encouragingly to each of them.
Furthermore she went to the house of Ulysses, and threw the suitors into a deep slumber.
She caused their drink to fuddle them, and made them drop their cups from their hands, so that instead of sitting over their wine, they went back into the town to sleep, with their eyes heavy and full of drowsiness.
Then she took the form and voice of Mentor, and called Telemachus to come outside.
“Telemachus,” said she, “the men are on board and at their oars, waiting for you to give your orders, so make haste and let us be off.” On this she led the way, while Telemachus followed in her steps.
When they got to the ship they found the crew waiting by the water side, and Telemachus said, “Now my men, help me to get the stores on board; they are all put together in the cloister, and my mother does not know anything about it, nor any of the maid servants except one.” With these words he led the way and the others followed after.
When they had brought the things as he told them, Telemachus went on board, Minerva going before him and taking her seat in the stern of the vessel, while Telemachus sat beside her.
Then the men loosed the hawsers and took their places on the benches.
Minerva sent them a fair wind from the West,22 that whistled over the deep blue waves23 whereon Telemachus told them to catch hold of the ropes and hoist sail, and they did as he told them.
They set the mast in its socket in the cross plank, raised it, and made it fast with the forestays; then they hoisted their white sails aloft with ropes of twisted ox hide.
As the sail bellied out with the wind, the ship flew through the deep blue water, and the foam hissed against her bows as she sped onward.
Then they made all fast throughout the ship, filled the mixing bowls to the brim, and made drink offerings to the immortal gods that are from everlasting, but more particularly to the grey-eyed daughter of Jove.
Thus, then, the ship sped on her way through the watches of the night from dark till dawn, BOOK III TELEMACHUS VISITS NESTOR AT PYLOS.
but as the sun was rising from the fair sea24 into the firmament of heaven to shed light on mortals and immortals, they reached Pylos the city of Neleus.
Now the people of Pylos were gathered on the sea shore to offer sacrifice of black bulls to Neptune lord of the Earthquake.
There were nine guilds with five hundred men in each, and there were nine bulls to each guild.
As they were eating the inward meats25 and burning the thigh bones [on the embers] in the name of Neptune, Telemachus and his crew arrived, furled their sails, brought their ship to anchor, and went ashore.
Minerva led the way and Telemachus followed her.
Presently she said, “Telemachus, you must not be in the least shy or nervous; you have taken this voyage to try and find out where your father is buried and how he came by his end; so go straight up to Nestor that we may see what he has got to tell us.
Beg of him to speak the truth, and he will tell no lies, for he is an excellent person.” “But how, Mentor,” replied Telemachus, “dare I go up to Nestor, and how am I to address him?
I have never yet been used to holding long conversations with people, and am ashamed to begin questioning one who is so much older than myself.” “Some things, Telemachus,” answered Minerva, “will be suggested to you by your own instinct, and heaven will prompt you further; for I am assured that the gods have been with you from the time of your birth until now.” She then went quickly on, and Telemachus followed in her steps till they reached the place where the guilds of the Pylian people were assembled.
There they found Nestor sitting with his sons, while his company round him were busy getting dinner ready, and putting pieces of meat on to the spits26 while other pieces were cooking.
When they saw the strangers they crowded round them, took them by the hand and bade them take their places.
Nestor’s son Pisistratus at once offered his hand to each of them, and seated them on some soft sheepskins that were lying on the sands near his father and his brother Thrasymedes.
Then he gave them their portions of the inward meats and poured wine for them into a golden cup, handing it to Minerva first, and saluting her at the same time.
“Offer a prayer, sir,” said he, “to King Neptune, for it is his feast that you are joining; when you have duly prayed and made your drink offering, pass the cup to your friend that he may do so also.
I doubt not that he too lifts his hands in prayer, for man cannot live without God in the world.
Still he is younger than you are, and is much of an age with myself, so I will give you the precedence.” As he spoke he handed her the cup.
Minerva thought it very right and proper of him to have given it to herself first;27 she accordingly began praying heartily to Neptune.
“O thou,” she cried, “that encirclest the earth, vouchsafe to grant the prayers of thy servants that call upon thee.
More especially we pray thee send down thy grace on Nestor and on his sons; thereafter also make the rest of the Pylian people some handsome return for the goodly hecatomb they are offering you.
Lastly, grant Telemachus and myself a happy issue, in respect of the matter that has brought us in our ship to Pylos.” When she had thus made an end of praying, she handed the cup to Telemachus and he prayed likewise.
By and by, when the outer meats were roasted and had been taken off the spits, the carvers gave every man his portion and they all made an excellent dinner.
As soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, Nestor, knight of Gerene, began to speak.
“Now,” said he, “that our guests have done their dinner, it will be best to ask them who they are.
Who, then, sir strangers, are you, and from what port have you sailed?
Are you traders?
or do you sail the seas as rovers with your hand against every man, and every man’s hand against you?” Telemachus answered boldly, for Minerva had given him courage to ask about his father and get himself a good name.
“Nestor,” said he, “son of Neleus, honour to the Achaean name, you ask whence we come, and I will tell you.
We come from Ithaca under Neritum,28 and the matter about which I would speak is of private not public import.
I seek news of my unhappy father Ulysses, who is said to have sacked the town of Troy in company with yourself.
We know what fate befell each one of the other heroes who fought at Troy, but as regards Ulysses heaven has hidden from us the knowledge even that he is dead at all, for no one can certify us in what place he perished, nor say whether he fell in battle on the mainland, or was lost at sea amid the waves of Amphitrite.
Therefore I am suppliant at your knees, if haply you may be pleased to tell me of his melancholy end, whether you saw it with your own eyes, or heard it from some other traveller, for he was a man born to trouble.
Do not soften things out of any pity for me, but tell me in all plainness exactly what you saw.
If my brave father Ulysses ever did you loyal service, either by word or deed, when you Achaeans were harassed among the Trojans, bear it in mind now as in my favour and tell me truly all.” “My friend,” answered Nestor, “you recall a time of much sorrow to my mind, for the brave Achaeans suffered much both at sea, while privateering under Achilles, and when fighting before the great city of king Priam.
Our best men all of them fell there—Ajax, Achilles, Patroclus peer of gods in counsel, and my own dear son Antilochus, a man singularly fleet of foot and in fight valiant.
But we suffered much more than this; what mortal tongue indeed could tell the whole story?
Though you were to stay here and question me for five years, or even six, I could not tell you all that the Achaeans suffered, and you would turn homeward weary of my tale before it ended.
Nine long years did we try every kind of stratagem, but the hand of heaven was against us; during all this time there was no one who could compare with your father in subtlety—if indeed you are his son—I can hardly believe my eyes—and you talk just like him too—no one would say that people of such different ages could speak so much alike.
He and I never had any kind of difference from first to last neither in camp nor council, but in singleness of heart and purpose we advised the Argives how all might be ordered for the best.
“When, however, we had sacked the city of Priam, and were setting sail in our ships as heaven had dispersed us, then Jove saw fit to vex the Argives on their homeward voyage; for they had not all been either wise or understanding, and hence many came to a bad end through the displeasure of Jove’s daughter Minerva, who brought about a quarrel between the two sons of Atreus.
“The sons of Atreus called a meeting which was not as it should be, for it was sunset and the Achaeans were heavy with wine.
When they explained why they had called the people together, it seemed that Menelaus was for sailing homeward at once, and this displeased Agamemnon, who thought that we should wait till we had offered hecatombs to appease the anger of Minerva.
Fool that he was, he might have known that he would not prevail with her, for when the gods have made up their minds they do not change them lightly.
So the two stood bandying hard words, whereon the Achaeans sprang to their feet with a cry that rent the air, and were of two minds as to what they should do.
“That night we rested and nursed our anger, for Jove was hatching mischief against us.
But in the morning some of us drew our ships into the water and put our goods with our women on board, while the rest, about half in number, stayed behind with Agamemnon.
We—the other half—embarked and sailed; and the ships went well, for heaven had smoothed the sea.
When we reached Tenedos we offered sacrifices to the gods, for we were longing to get home; cruel Jove, however, did not yet mean that we should do so, and raised a second quarrel in the course of which some among us turned their ships back again, and sailed away under Ulysses to make their peace with Agamemnon; but I, and all the ships that were with me pressed forward, for I saw that mischief was brewing.
The son of Tydeus went on also with me, and his crews with him.
Later on Menelaus joined us at Lesbos, and found us making up our minds about our course—for we did not know whether to go outside Chios by the island of Psyra, keeping this to our left, or inside Chios, over against the stormy headland of Mimas.
So we asked heaven for a sign, and were shown one to the effect that we should be soonest out of danger if we headed our ships across the open sea to Euboea.
This we therefore did, and a fair wind sprang up which gave us a quick passage during the night to Geraestus,29 where we offered many sacrifices to Neptune for having helped us so far on our way.
Four days later Diomed and his men stationed their ships in Argos, but I held on for Pylos, and the wind never fell light from the day when heaven first made it fair for me.
“Therefore, my dear young friend, I returned without hearing anything about the others.
I know neither who got home safely nor who were lost but, as in duty bound, I will give you without reserve the reports that have reached me since I have been here in my own house.
They say the Myrmidons returned home safely under Achilles’ son Neoptolemus; so also did the valiant son of Poias, Philoctetes.
Idomeneus, again, lost no men at sea, and all his followers who escaped death in the field got safe home with him to Crete.
No matter how far out of the world you live, you will have heard of Agamemnon and the bad end he came to at the hands of Aegisthus—and a fearful reckoning did Aegisthus presently pay.
See what a good thing it is for a man to leave a son behind him to do as Orestes did, who killed false Aegisthus the murderer of his noble father.
You too, then—for you are a tall smart-looking fellow—show your mettle and make yourself a name in story.” “Nestor son of Neleus,” answered Telemachus, “honour to the Achaean name, the Achaeans applaud Orestes and his name will live through all time for he has avenged his father nobly.
Would that heaven might grant me to do like vengeance on the insolence of the wicked suitors, who are ill treating me and plotting my ruin; but the gods have no such happiness in store for me and for my father, so we must bear it as best we may.” “My friend,” said Nestor, “now that you remind me, I remember to have heard that your mother has many suitors, who are ill disposed towards you and are making havoc of your estate.
Do you submit to this tamely, or are public feeling and the voice of heaven against you?
Who knows but what Ulysses may come back after all, and pay these scoundrels in full, either single-handed or with a force of Achaeans behind him?
If Minerva were to take as great a liking to you as she did to Ulysses when we were fighting before Troy (for I never yet saw the gods so openly fond of any one as Minerva then was of your father), if she would take as good care of you as she did of him, these wooers would soon some of them forget their wooing.” Telemachus answered, “I can expect nothing of the kind; it would be far too much to hope for.
I dare not let myself think of it.
Even though the gods themselves willed it no such good fortune could befall me.” On this Minerva said, “Telemachus, what are you talking about?
Heaven has a long arm if it is minded to save a man; and if it were me, I should not care how much I suffered before getting home, provided I could be safe when I was once there.
I would rather this, than get home quickly, and then be killed in my own house as Agamemnon was by the treachery of Aegisthus and his wife.
Still, death is certain, and when a man’s hour is come, not even the gods can save him, no matter how fond they are of him.” “Mentor,” answered Telemachus, “do not let us talk about it any more.
There is no chance of my father’s ever coming back; the gods have long since counselled his destruction.
There is something else, however, about which I should like to ask Nestor, for he knows much more than any one else does.
They say he has reigned for three generations so that it is like talking to an immortal.
Tell me, therefore, Nestor, and tell me true; how did Agamemnon come to die in that way?
What was Menelaus doing?
And how came false Aegisthus to kill so far better a man than himself?
Was Menelaus away from Achaean Argos, voyaging elsewhither among mankind, that Aegisthus took heart and killed Agamemnon?” “I will tell you truly,” answered Nestor, “and indeed you have yourself divined how it all happened.
If Menelaus when he got back from Troy had found Aegisthus still alive in his house, there would have been no barrow heaped up for him, not even when he was dead, but he would have been thrown outside the city to dogs and vultures, and not a woman would have mourned him, for he had done a deed of great wickedness; but we were over there, fighting hard at Troy, and Aegisthus, who was taking his ease quietly in the heart of Argos, cajoled Agamemnon’s wife Clytemnestra with incessant flattery.
“At first she would have nothing to do with his wicked scheme, for she was of a good natural disposition;30 moreover there was a bard with her, to whom Agamemnon had given strict orders on setting out for Troy, that he was to keep guard over his wife; but when heaven had counselled her destruction, Aegisthus carried this bard off to a desert island and left him there for crows and seagulls to batten upon—after which she went willingly enough to the house of Aegisthus.
Then he offered many burnt sacrifices to the gods, and decorated many temples with tapestries and gilding, for he had succeeded far beyond his expectations.
“Meanwhile Menelaus and I were on our way home from Troy, on good terms with one another.
When we got to Sunium, which is the point of Athens, Apollo with his painless shafts killed Phrontis the steersman of Menelaus’ ship (and never man knew better how to handle a vessel in rough weather) so that he died then and there with the helm in his hand, and Menelaus, though very anxious to press forward, had to wait in order to bury his comrade and give him his due funeral rites.
Presently, when he too could put to sea again, and had sailed on as far as the Malean heads, Jove counselled evil against him and made it blow hard till the waves ran mountains high.
Here he divided his fleet and took the one half towards Crete where the Cydonians dwell round about the waters of the river Iardanus.
There is a high headland hereabouts stretching out into the sea from a place called Gortyn, and all along this part of the coast as far as Phaestus the sea runs high when there is a south wind blowing, but after Phaestus the coast is more protected, for a small headland can make a great shelter.
Here this part of the fleet was driven on to the rocks and wrecked; but the crews just managed to save themselves.
As for the other five ships, they were taken by winds and seas to Egypt, where Menelaus gathered much gold and substance among people of an alien speech.
Meanwhile Aegisthus here at home plotted his evil deed.
For seven years after he had killed Agamemnon he ruled in Mycene, and the people were obedient under him, but in the eighth year Orestes came back from Athens to be his bane, and killed the murderer of his father.
Then he celebrated the funeral rites of his mother and of false Aegisthus by a banquet to the people of Argos, and on that very day Menelaus came home,31 with as much treasure as his ships could carry.
“Take my advice then, and do not go travelling about for long so far from home, nor leave your property with such dangerous people in your house; they will eat up everything you have among them, and you will have been on a fool’s errand.
Still, I should advise you by all means to go and visit Menelaus, who has lately come off a voyage among such distant peoples as no man could ever hope to get back from, when the winds had once carried him so far out of his reckoning; even birds cannot fly the distance in a twelve-month, so vast and terrible are the seas that they must cross.
Go to him, therefore, by sea, and take your own men with you; or if you would rather travel by land you can have a chariot, you can have horses, and here are my sons who can escort you to Lacedaemon where Menelaus lives.
Beg of him to speak the truth, and he will tell you no lies, for he is an excellent person.” As he spoke the sun set and it came on dark, whereon Minerva said, “Sir, all that you have said is well; now, however, order the tongues of the victims to be cut, and mix wine that we may make drink-offerings to Neptune, and the other immortals, and then go to bed, for it is bed time.
People should go away early and not keep late hours at a religious festival.” Thus spoke the daughter of Jove, and they obeyed her saying.
Men servants poured water over the hands of the guests, while pages filled the mixing-bowls with wine and water, and handed it round after giving every man his drink offering; then they threw the tongues of the victims into the fire, and stood up to make their drink offerings.
When they had made their offerings and had drunk each as much as he was minded, Minerva and Telemachus were for going on board their ship, but Nestor caught them up at once and stayed them.
“Heaven and the immortal gods,” he exclaimed, “forbid that you should leave my house to go on board of a ship.
Do you think I am so poor and short of clothes, or that I have so few cloaks and as to be unable to find comfortable beds both for myself and for my guests?
Let me tell you I have store both of rugs and cloaks, and shall not permit the son of my old friend Ulysses to camp down on the deck of a ship—not while I live—nor yet will my sons after me, but they will keep open house as I have done.” Then Minerva answered, “Sir, you have spoken well, and it will be much better that Telemachus should do as you have said; he, therefore, shall return with you and sleep at your house, but I must go back to give orders to my crew, and keep them in good heart.
I am the only older person among them; the rest are all young men of Telemachus’ own age, who have taken this voyage out of friendship; so I must return to the ship and sleep there.
Moreover to-morrow I must go to the Cauconians where I have a large sum of money long owing to me.
As for Telemachus, now that he is your guest, send him to Lacedaemon in a chariot, and let one of your sons go with him.
Be pleased to also provide him with your best and fleetest horses.” When she had thus spoken, she flew away in the form of an eagle, and all marvelled as they beheld it.
Nestor was astonished, and took Telemachus by the hand.
“My friend,” said he, “I see that you are going to be a great hero some day, since the gods wait upon you thus while you are still so young.
This can have been none other of those who dwell in heaven than Jove’s redoubtable daughter, the Trito-born, who shewed such favour towards your brave father among the Argives.
Holy queen,” he continued, “vouchsafe to send down thy grace upon myself, my good wife, and my children.
In return, I will offer you in sacrifice a broad-browed heifer of a year old, unbroken, and never yet brought by man under the yoke.
I will gild her horns, and will offer her up to you in sacrifice.” Thus did he pray, and Minerva heard his prayer.
He then led the way to his own house, followed by his sons and sons in law.
When they had got there and had taken their places on the benches and seats, he mixed them a bowl of sweet wine that was eleven years old when the housekeeper took the lid off the jar that held it.
As he mixed the wine, he prayed much and made drink offerings to Minerva, daughter of Aegis-bearing Jove.
Then, when they had made their drink offerings and had drunk each as much as he was minded, the others went home to bed each in his own abode; but Nestor put Telemachus to sleep in the room that was over the gateway along with Pisistratus, who was the only unmarried son now left him.
As for himself, he slept in an inner room of the house, with the queen his wife by his side.
Now when the child of morning rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, Nestor left his couch and took his seat on the benches of white and polished marble that stood in front of his house.
Here aforetime sat Neleus, peer of gods in counsel, but he was now dead, and had gone to the house of Hades; so Nestor sat in his seat sceptre in hand, as guardian of the public weal.
His sons as they left their rooms gathered round him, Echephron, Stratius, Perseus, Aretus, and Thrasymedes; the sixth son was Pisistratus, and when Telemachus joined them they made him sit with them.
Nestor then addressed them.
“My sons,” said he, “make haste to do as I shall bid you.
I wish first and foremost to propitiate the great goddess Minerva, who manifested herself visibly to me during yesterday’s festivities.
Go, then, one or other of you to the plain, tell the stockman to look me out a heifer, and come on here with it at once.
Another must go to Telemachus’ ship, and invite all the crew, leaving two men only in charge of the vessel.
Some one else will run and fetch Laerceus the goldsmith to gild the horns of the heifer.
The rest, stay all of you where you are; tell the maids in the house to prepare an excellent dinner, and to fetch seats, and logs of wood for a burnt offering.
Tell them also to bring me some clear spring water.” On this they hurried off on their several errands.
The heifer was brought in from the plain, and Telemachus’s crew came from the ship; the goldsmith brought the anvil, hammer, and tongs, with which he worked his gold, and Minerva herself came to accept the sacrifice.
Nestor gave out the gold, and the smith gilded the horns of the heifer that the goddess might have pleasure in their beauty.
Then Stratius and Echephron brought her in by the horns; Aretus fetched water from the house in a ewer that had a flower pattern on it, and in his other hand he held a basket of barley meal; sturdy Thrasymedes stood by with a sharp axe, ready to strike the heifer, while Perseus held a bucket.
Then Nestor began with washing his hands and sprinkling the barley meal, and he offered many a prayer to Minerva as he threw a lock from the heifer’s head upon the fire.
When they had done praying and sprinkling the barley meal32 Thrasymedes dealt his blow, and brought the heifer down with a stroke that cut through the tendons at the base of her neck, whereon the daughters and daughters in law of Nestor, and his venerable wife Eurydice (she was eldest daughter to Clymenus) screamed with delight.
Then they lifted the heifer’s head from off the ground, and Pisistratus cut her throat.
When she had done bleeding and was quite dead, they cut her up.
They cut out the thigh bones all in due course, wrapped them round in two layers of fat, and set some pieces of raw meat on the top of them; then Nestor laid them upon the wood fire and poured wine over them, while the young men stood near him with five-pronged spits in their hands.
When the thighs were burned and they had tasted the inward meats, they cut the rest of the meat up small, put the pieces on the spits and toasted them over the fire.
Meanwhile lovely Polycaste, Nestor’s youngest daughter, washed Telemachus.
When she had washed him and anointed him with oil, she brought him a fair mantle and shirt,33 and he looked like a god as he came from the bath and took his seat by the side of Nestor.
When the outer meats were done they drew them off the spits and sat down to dinner where they were waited upon by some worthy henchmen, who kept pouring them out their wine in cups of gold.
As soon as they had had enough to eat and drink Nestor said, “Sons, put Telemachus’s horses to the chariot that he may start at once.” Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said, and yoked the fleet horses to the chariot.
The housekeeper packed them up a provision of bread, wine, and sweet meats fit for the sons of princes.
Then Telemachus got into the chariot, while Pisistratus gathered up the reins and took his seat beside him.
He lashed the horses on and they flew forward nothing loth into the open country, leaving the high citadel of Pylos behind them.
All that day did they travel, swaying the yoke upon their necks till the sun went down and darkness was over all the land.
Then they reached Pherae where Diocles lived, who was son to Ortilochus and grandson to Alpheus.
Here they passed the night and Diocles entertained them hospitably.
When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, they again yoked their horses and drove out through the gateway under the echoing gatehouse.34 Pisistratus lashed the horses on and they flew forward nothing loth; presently they came to the corn lands of the open country, and in the course of time completed their journey, so well did their steeds take them.35 Now when the sun had set and darkness was over the land, BOOK IV THE VISIT TO KING MENELAUS, WHO TELLS HIS STORY—MEANWHILE THE SUITORS IN ITHACA PLOT AGAINST TELEMACHUS.
they reached the low lying city of Lacedaemon, where they drove straight to the abode of Menelaus36 [and found him in his own house, feasting with his many clansmen in honour of the wedding of his son, and also of his daughter, whom he was marrying to the son of that valiant warrior Achilles.
He had given his consent and promised her to him while he was still at Troy, and now the gods were bringing the marriage about; so he was sending her with chariots and horses to the city of the Myrmidons over whom Achilles’ son was reigning.
For his only son he had found a bride from Sparta,37 the daughter of Alector.
This son, Megapenthes, was born to him of a bondwoman, for heaven vouchsafed Helen no more children after she had borne Hermione, who was fair as golden Venus herself.
So the neighbours and kinsmen of Menelaus were feasting and making merry in his house.
There was a bard also to sing to them and play his lyre, while two tumblers went about performing in the midst of them when the man struck up with his tune.38 Telemachus and the son of Nestor stayed their horses at the gate, whereon Eteoneus servant to Menelaus came out, and as soon as he saw them ran hurrying back into the house to tell his Master.
He went close up to him and said, “Menelaus, there are some strangers come here, two men, who look like sons of Jove.
What are we to do?
Shall we take their horses out, or tell them to find friends elsewhere as they best can?” Menelaus was very angry and said, “Eteoneus, son of Boethous, you never used to be a fool, but now you talk like a simpleton.
Take their horses out, of course, and show the strangers in that they may have supper; you and I have staid often enough at other people’s houses before we got back here, where heaven grant that we may rest in peace henceforward.” So Eteoneus bustled back and bade the other servants come with him.
They took their sweating steeds from under the yoke, made them fast to the mangers, and gave them a feed of oats and barley mixed.
Then they leaned the chariot against the end wall of the courtyard, and led the way into the house.
Telemachus and Pisistratus were astonished when they saw it, for its splendour was as that of the sun and moon; then, when they had admired everything to their heart’s content, they went into the bath room and washed themselves.
When the servants had washed them and anointed them with oil, they brought them woollen cloaks and shirts, and the two took their seats by the side of Menelaus.
A maid-servant brought them water in a beautiful golden ewer, and poured it into a silver basin for them to wash their hands; and she drew a clean table beside them.
An upper servant brought them bread, and offered them many good things of what there was in the house, while the carver fetched them plates of all manner of meats and set cups of gold by their side.
Menelaus then greeted them saying, “Fall to, and welcome; when you have done supper I shall ask who you are, for the lineage of such men as you cannot have been lost.
You must be descended from a line of sceptre-bearing kings, for poor people do not have such sons as you are.” On this he handed them39 a piece of fat roast loin, which had been set near him as being a prime part, and they laid their hands on the good things that were before them; as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, Telemachus said to the son of Nestor, with his head so close that no one might hear, “Look, Pisistratus, man after my own heart, see the gleam of bronze and gold—of amber,40 ivory, and silver.
Everything is so splendid that it is like seeing the palace of Olympian Jove.
I am lost in admiration.” Menelaus overheard him and said, “No one, my sons, can hold his own with Jove, for his house and everything about him is immortal; but among mortal men—well, there may be another who has as much wealth as I have, or there may not; but at all events I have travelled much and have undergone much hardship, for it was nearly eight years before I could get home with my fleet.
I went to Cyprus, Phoenicia and the Egyptians; I went also to the Ethiopians, the Sidonians, and the Erembians, and to Libya where the lambs have horns as soon as they are born, and the sheep lamb down three times a year.
Every one in that country, whether master or man, has plenty of cheese, meat, and good milk, for the ewes yield all the year round.
But while I was travelling and getting great riches among these people, my brother was secretly and shockingly murdered through the perfidy of his wicked wife, so that I have no pleasure in being lord of all this wealth.
Whoever your parents may be they must have told you about all this, and of my heavy loss in the ruin41 of a stately mansion fully and magnificently furnished.
Would that I had only a third of what I now have so that I had stayed at home, and all those were living who perished on the plain of Troy, far from Argos.
I often grieve, as I sit here in my house, for one and all of them.
At times I cry aloud for sorrow, but presently I leave off again, for crying is cold comfort and one soon tires of it.
Yet grieve for these as I may, I do so for one man more than for them all.
I cannot even think of him without loathing both food and sleep, so miserable does he make me, for no one of all the Achaeans worked so hard or risked so much as he did.
He took nothing by it, and has left a legacy of sorrow to myself, for he has been gone a long time, and we know not whether he is alive or dead.
His old father, his long-suffering wife Penelope, and his son Telemachus, whom he left behind him an infant in arms, are plunged in grief on his account.” Thus spoke Menelaus, and the heart of Telemachus yearned as he bethought him of his father.
Tears fell from his eyes as he heard him thus mentioned, so that he held his cloak before his face with both hands.
When Menelaus saw this he doubted whether to let him choose his own time for speaking, or to ask him at once and find what it was all about.
While he was thus in two minds Helen came down from her high vaulted and perfumed room, looking as lovely as Diana herself.
Adraste brought her a seat, Alcippe a soft woollen rug while Phylo fetched her the silver work-box which Alcandra wife of Polybus had given her.
Polybus lived in Egyptian Thebes, which is the richest city in the whole world; he gave Menelaus two baths, both of pure silver, two tripods, and ten talents of gold; besides all this, his wife gave Helen some beautiful presents, to wit, a golden distaff, and a silver work box that ran on wheels, with a gold band round the top of it.
Phylo now placed this by her side, full of fine spun yarn, and a distaff charged with violet coloured wool was laid upon the top of it.
Then Helen took her seat, put her feet upon the footstool, and began to question her husband.42 “Do we know, Menelaus,” said she, “the names of these strangers who have come to visit us?
Shall I guess right or wrong?—but I cannot help saying what I think.
Never yet have I seen either man or woman so like somebody else (indeed when I look at him I hardly know what to think) as this young man is like Telemachus, whom Ulysses left as a baby behind him, when you Achaeans went to Troy with battle in your hearts, on account of my most shameless self.” “My dear wife,” replied Menelaus, “I see the likeness just as you do.
His hands and feet are just like Ulysses; so is his hair, with the shape of his head and the expression of his eyes.
Moreover, when I was talking about Ulysses, and saying how much he had suffered on my account, tears fell from his eyes, and he hid his face in his mantle.” Then Pisistratus said, “Menelaus, son of Atreus, you are right in thinking that this young man is Telemachus, but he is very modest, and is ashamed to come here and begin opening up discourse with one whose conversation is so divinely interesting as your own.
My father, Nestor, sent me to escort him hither, for he wanted to know whether you could give him any counsel or suggestion.
A son has always trouble at home when his father has gone away leaving him without supporters; and this is how Telemachus is now placed, for his father is absent, and there is no one among his own people to stand by him.” “Bless my heart,” replied Menelaus, “then I am receiving a visit from the son of a very dear friend, who suffered much hardship for my sake.
I had always hoped to entertain him with most marked distinction when heaven had granted us a safe return from beyond the seas.
I should have founded a city for him in Argos, and built him a house.
I should have made him leave Ithaca with his goods, his son, and all his people, and should have sacked for them some one of the neighbouring cities that are subject to me.
We should thus have seen one another continually, and nothing but death could have interrupted so close and happy an intercourse.
I suppose, however, that heaven grudged us such great good fortune, for it has prevented the poor fellow from ever getting home at all.” Thus did he speak, and his words set them all a weeping.
Helen wept, Telemachus wept, and so did Menelaus, nor could Pisistratus keep his eyes from filling, when he remembered his dear brother Antilochus whom the son of bright Dawn had killed.
Thereon he said to Menelaus, “Sir, my father Nestor, when we used to talk about you at home, told me you were a person of rare and excellent understanding.
If, then, it be possible, do as I would urge you.
I am not fond of crying while I am getting my supper.
Morning will come in due course, and in the forenoon I care not how much I cry for those that are dead and gone.
This is all we can do for the poor things.
We can only shave our heads for them and wring the tears from our cheeks.
I had a brother who died at Troy; he was by no means the worst man there; you are sure to have known him—his name was Antilochus; I never set eyes upon him myself, but they say that he was singularly fleet of foot and in fight valiant.” “Your discretion, my friend,” answered Menelaus, “is beyond your years.
It is plain you take after your father.
One can soon see when a man is son to one whom heaven has blessed both as regards wife and offspring—and it has blessed Nestor from first to last all his days, giving him a green old age in his own house, with sons about him who are both well disposed and valiant.
We will put an end therefore to all this weeping, and attend to our supper again.
Let water be poured over our hands.
Telemachus and I can talk with one another fully in the morning.” On this Asphalion, one of the servants, poured water over their hands and they laid their hands on the good things that were before them.
Then Jove’s daughter Helen bethought her of another matter.
She drugged the wine with an herb that banishes all care, sorrow, and ill humour.
Whoever drinks wine thus drugged cannot shed a single tear all the rest of the day, not even though his father and mother both of them drop down dead, or he sees a brother or a son hewn in pieces before his very eyes.
This drug, of such sovereign power and virtue, had been given to Helen by Polydamna wife of Thon, a woman of Egypt, where there grow all sorts of herbs, some good to put into the mixing bowl and others poisonous.
Moreover, every one in the whole country is a skilled physician, for they are of the race of Paeeon.
When Helen had put this drug in the bowl, and had told the servants to serve the wine round, she said: “Menelaus, son of Atreus, and you my good friends, sons of honourable men (which is as Jove wills, for he is the giver both of good and evil, and can do what he chooses), feast here as you will, and listen while I tell you a tale in season.
I cannot indeed name every single one of the exploits of Ulysses, but I can say what he did when he was before Troy, and you Achaeans were in all sorts of difficulties.
He covered himself with wounds and bruises, dressed himself all in rags, and entered the enemy’s city looking like a menial or a beggar, and quite different from what he did when he was among his own people.
In this disguise he entered the city of Troy, and no one said anything to him.
I alone recognised him and began to question him, but he was too cunning for me.
When, however, I had washed and anointed him and had given him clothes, and after I had sworn a solemn oath not to betray him to the Trojans till he had got safely back to his own camp and to the ships, he told me all that the Achaeans meant to do.
He killed many Trojans and got much information before he reached the Argive camp, for all which things the Trojan women made lamentation, but for my own part I was glad, for my heart was beginning to yearn after my home, and I was unhappy about the wrong that Venus had done me in taking me over there, away from my country, my girl, and my lawful wedded husband, who is indeed by no means deficient either in person or understanding.” Then Menelaus said, “All that you have been saying, my dear wife, is true.
I have travelled much, and have had much to do with heroes, but I have never seen such another man as Ulysses.
What endurance too, and what courage he displayed within the wooden horse, wherein all the bravest of the Argives were lying in wait to bring death and destruction upon the Trojans.43 At that moment you came up to us; some god who wished well to the Trojans must have set you on to it and you had Deiphobus with you.
Three times did you go all round our hiding place and pat it; you called our chiefs each by his own name, and mimicked all our wives—Diomed, Ulysses, and I from our seats inside heard what a noise you made.
Diomed and I could not make up our minds whether to spring out then and there, or to answer you from inside, but Ulysses held us all in check, so we sat quite still, all except Anticlus, who was beginning to answer you, when Ulysses clapped his two brawny hands over his mouth, and kept them there.
It was this that saved us all, for he muzzled Anticlus till Minerva took you away again.” “How sad,” exclaimed Telemachus, “that all this was of no avail to save him, nor yet his own iron courage.
But now, sir, be pleased to send us all to bed, that we may lie down and enjoy the blessed boon of sleep.” On this Helen told the maid servants to set beds in the room that was in the gatehouse, and to make them with good red rugs, and spread coverlets on the top of them with woollen cloaks for the guests to wear.
So the maids went out, carrying a torch, and made the beds, to which a man-servant presently conducted the strangers.
Thus, then, did Telemachus and Pisistratus sleep there in the forecourt, while the son of Atreus lay in an inner room with lovely Helen by his side.
When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, Menelaus rose and dressed himself.
He bound his sandals on to his comely feet, girded his sword about his shoulders, and left his room looking like an immortal god.
Then, taking a seat near Telemachus he said: “And what, Telemachus, has led you to take this long sea voyage to Lacedaemon?
Are you on public, or private business?
Tell me all about it.” “I have come, sir,” replied Telemachus, “to see if you can tell me anything about my father.
I am being eaten out of house and home; my fair estate is being wasted, and my house is full of miscreants who keep killing great numbers of my sheep and oxen, on the pretence of paying their addresses to my mother.
Therefore, I am suppliant at your knees if haply you may tell me about my father’s melancholy end, whether you saw it with your own eyes, or heard it from some other traveller; for he was a man born to trouble.
Do not soften things out of any pity for myself, but tell me in all plainness exactly what you saw.
If my brave father Ulysses ever did you loyal service either by word or deed, when you Achaeans were harassed by the Trojans, bear it in mind now as in my favour and tell me truly all.” Menelaus on hearing this was very much shocked.
“So,” he exclaimed, “these cowards would usurp a brave man’s bed?
A hind might as well lay her new born young in the lair of a lion, and then go off to feed in the forest or in some grassy dell: the lion when he comes back to his lair will make short work with the pair of them—and so will Ulysses with these suitors.
By father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, if Ulysses is still the man that he was when he wrestled with Philomeleides in Lesbos, and threw him so heavily that all the Achaeans cheered him—if he is still such and were to come near these suitors, they would have a short shrift and a sorry wedding.
As regards your questions, however, I will not prevaricate nor deceive you, but will tell you without concealment all that the old man of the sea told me.
“I was trying to come on here, but the gods detained me in Egypt, for my hecatombs had not given them full satisfaction, and the gods are very strict about having their dues.
Now off Egypt, about as far as a ship can sail in a day with a good stiff breeze behind her, there is an island called Pharos—it has a good harbour from which vessels can get out into open sea when they have taken in water—and here the gods becalmed me twenty days without so much as a breath of fair wind to help me forward.
We should have run clean out of provisions and my men would have starved, if a goddess had not taken pity upon me and saved me in the person of Idothea, daughter to Proteus, the old man of the sea, for she had taken a great fancy to me.
“She came to me one day when I was by myself, as I often was, for the men used to go with their barbed hooks, all over the island in the hope of catching a fish or two to save them from the pangs of hunger.
‘Stranger,’ said she, ‘it seems to me that you like starving in this way—at any rate it does not greatly trouble you, for you stick here day after day, without even trying to get away though your men are dying by inches.’ “‘Let me tell you,’ said I, ‘whichever of the goddesses you may happen to be, that I am not staying here of my own accord, but must have offended the gods that live in heaven.
Tell me, therefore, for the gods know everything, which of the immortals it is that is hindering me in this way, and tell me also how I may sail the sea so as to reach my home.’ “‘Stranger,’ replied she, ‘I will make it all quite clear to you.
There is an old immortal who lives under the sea hereabouts and whose name is Proteus.
He is an Egyptian, and people say he is my father; he is Neptune’s head man and knows every inch of ground all over the bottom of the sea.
If you can snare him and hold him tight, he will tell you about your voyage, what courses you are to take, and how you are to sail the sea so as to reach your home.
He will also tell you, if you so will, all that has been going on at your house both good and bad, while you have been away on your long and dangerous journey.’ “‘Can you show me,’ said I, ‘some stratagem by means of which I may catch this old god without his suspecting it and finding me out?
For a god is not easily caught—not by a mortal man.’ “‘Stranger,’ said she, ‘I will make it all quite clear to you.
About the time when the sun shall have reached mid heaven, the old man of the sea comes up from under the waves, heralded by the West wind that furs the water over his head.
As soon as he has come up he lies down, and goes to sleep in a great sea cave, where the seals—Halosydne’s chickens as they call them—come up also from the grey sea, and go to sleep in shoals all round him; and a very strong and fish-like smell do they bring with them.
44 Early to-morrow morning I will take you to this place and will lay you in ambush.
Pick out, therefore, the three best men you have in your fleet, and I will tell you all the tricks that the old man will play you.
“‘First he will look over all his seals, and count them; then, when he has seen them and tallied them on his five fingers, he will go to sleep among them, as a shepherd among his sheep.
The moment you see that he is asleep seize him; put forth all your strength and hold him fast, for he will do his very utmost to get away from you.
He will turn himself into every kind of creature that goes upon the earth, and will become also both fire and water; but you must hold him fast and grip him tighter and tighter, till he begins to talk to you and comes back to what he was when you saw him go to sleep; then you may slacken your hold and let him go; and you can ask him which of the gods it is that is angry with you, and what you must do to reach your home over the seas.’ “Having so said she dived under the waves, whereon I turned back to the place where my ships were ranged upon the shore; and my heart was clouded with care as I went along.
When I reached my ship we got supper ready, for night was falling, and camped down upon the beach.
“When the child of morning rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, I took the three men on whose prowess of all kinds I could most rely, and went along by the sea-side, praying heartily to heaven.
Meanwhile the goddess fetched me up four seal skins from the bottom of the sea, all of them just skinned, for she meant playing a trick upon her father.
Then she dug four pits for us to lie in, and sat down to wait till we should come up.
When we were close to her, she made us lie down in the pits one after the other, and threw a seal skin over each of us.
Our ambuscade would have been intolerable, for the stench of the fishy seals was most distressing45—who would go to bed with a sea monster if he could help it?—but here, too, the goddess helped us, and thought of something that gave us great relief, for she put some ambrosia under each man’s nostrils, which was so fragrant that it killed the smell of the seals.46 “We waited the whole morning and made the best of it, watching the seals come up in hundreds to bask upon the sea shore, till at noon the old man of the sea came up too, and when he had found his fat seals he went over them and counted them.
We were among the first he counted, and he never suspected any guile, but laid himself down to sleep as soon as he had done counting.
Then we rushed upon him with a shout and seized him; on which he began at once with his old tricks, and changed himself first into a lion with a great mane; then all of a sudden he became a dragon, a leopard, a wild boar; the next moment he was running water, and then again directly he was a tree, but we stuck to him and never lost hold, till at last the cunning old creature became distressed, and said, ‘Which of the gods was it, Son of Atreus, that hatched this plot with you for snaring me and seizing me against my will?
What do you want?’ “‘You know that yourself, old man,’ I answered, ‘you will gain nothing by trying to put me off.
It is because I have been kept so long in this island, and see no sign of my being able to get away.
I am losing all heart; tell me, then, for you gods know everything, which of the immortals it is that is hindering me, and tell me also how I may sail the sea so as to reach my home?’ “Then,’ he said, ‘if you would finish your voyage and get home quickly, you must offer sacrifices to Jove and to the rest of the gods before embarking; for it is decreed that you shall not get back to your friends, and to your own house, till you have returned to the heaven-fed stream of Egypt, and offered holy hecatombs to the immortal gods that reign in heaven.
When you have done this they will let you finish your voyage.’ “I was broken hearted when I heard that I must go back all that long and terrible voyage to Egypt;47 nevertheless, I answered, ‘I will do all, old man, that you have laid upon me; but now tell me, and tell me true, whether all the Achaeans whom Nestor and I left behind us when we set sail from Troy have got home safely, or whether any one of them came to a bad end either on board his own ship or among his friends when the days of his fighting were done.’ “‘Son of Atreus,’ he answered, ‘why ask me?
You had better not know what I can tell you, for your eyes will surely fill when you have heard my story.
Many of those about whom you ask are dead and gone, but many still remain, and only two of the chief men among the Achaeans perished during their return home.
As for what happened on the field of battle—you were there yourself.
A third Achaean leader is still at sea, alive, but hindered from returning.
Ajax was wrecked, for Neptune drove him on to the great rocks of Gyrae; nevertheless, he let him get safe out of the water, and in spite of all Minerva’s hatred he would have escaped death, if he had not ruined himself by boasting.
He said the gods could not drown him even though they had tried to do so, and when Neptune heard this large talk, he seized his trident in his two brawny hands, and split the rock of Gyrae in two pieces.
The base remained where it was, but the part on which Ajax was sitting fell headlong into the sea and carried Ajax with it; so he drank salt water and was drowned.
“‘Your brother and his ships escaped, for Juno protected him, but when he was just about to reach the high promontory of Malea, he was caught by a heavy gale which carried him out to sea again sorely against his will, and drove him to the foreland where Thyestes used to dwell, but where Aegisthus was then living.
By and by, however, it seemed as though he was to return safely after all, for the gods backed the wind into its old quarter and they reached home; whereon Agamemnon kissed his native soil, and shed tears of joy at finding himself in his own country.
“‘Now there was a watchman whom Aegisthus kept always on the watch, and to whom he had promised two talents of gold.
This man had been looking out for a whole year to make sure that Agamemnon did not give him the slip and prepare war; when, therefore, this man saw Agamemnon go by, he went and told Aegisthus, who at once began to lay a plot for him.
He picked twenty of his bravest warriors and placed them in ambuscade on one side the cloister, while on the opposite side he prepared a banquet.
Then he sent his chariots and horsemen to Agamemnon, and invited him to the feast, but he meant foul play.
He got him there, all unsuspicious of the doom that was awaiting him, and killed him when the banquet was over as though he were butchering an ox in the shambles; not one of Agamemnon’s followers was left alive, nor yet one of Aegisthus’, but they were all killed there in the cloisters.’ “Thus spoke Proteus, and I was broken hearted as I heard him.
I sat down upon the sands and wept; I felt as though I could no longer bear to live nor look upon the light of the sun.
Presently, when I had had my fill of weeping and writhing upon the ground, the old man of the sea said, ‘Son of Atreus, do not waste any more time in crying so bitterly; it can do no manner of good; find your way home as fast as ever you can, for Aegisthus may be still alive, and even though Orestes has been beforehand with you in killing him, you may yet come in for his funeral.’ “On this I took comfort in spite of all my sorrow, and said, ‘I know, then, about these two; tell me, therefore, about the third man of whom you spoke; is he still alive, but at sea, and unable to get home?
or is he dead?
Tell me, no matter how much it may grieve me.’ “‘The third man,’ he answered, ‘is Ulysses who dwells in Ithaca.
I can see him in an island sorrowing bitterly in the house of the nymph Calypso, who is keeping him prisoner, and he cannot reach his home for he has no ships nor sailors to take him over the sea.
As for your own end, Menelaus, you shall not die in Argos, but the gods will take you to the Elysian plain, which is at the ends of the world.
There fair-haired Rhadamanthus reigns, and men lead an easier life than any where else in the world, for in Elysium there falls not rain, nor hail, nor snow, but Oceanus breathes ever with a West wind that sings softly from the sea, and gives fresh life to all men.
This will happen to you because you have married Helen, and are Jove’s son-in-law.’ “As he spoke he dived under the waves, whereon I turned back to the ships with my companions, and my heart was clouded with care as I went along.
When we reached the ships we got supper ready, for night was falling, and camped down upon the beach.
When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, we drew our ships into the water, and put our masts and sails within them; then we went on board ourselves, took our seats on the benches, and smote the grey sea with our oars.
I again stationed my ships in the heaven-fed stream of Egypt, and offered hecatombs that were full and sufficient.
When I had thus appeased heaven’s anger, I raised a barrow to the memory of Agamemnon that his name might live for ever, after which I had a quick passage home, for the gods sent me a fair wind.
“And now for yourself—stay here some ten or twelve days longer, and I will then speed you on your way.
I will make you a noble present of a chariot and three horses.
I will also give you a beautiful chalice that so long as you live you may think of me whenever you make a drink-offering to the immortal gods.” “Son of Atreus,” replied Telemachus, “do not press me to stay longer; I should be contented to remain with you for another twelve months; I find your conversation so delightful that I should never once wish myself at home with my parents; but my crew whom I have left at Pylos are already impatient, and you are detaining me from them.
As for any present you may be disposed to make me, I had rather that it should be a piece of plate.
I will take no horses back with me to Ithaca, but will leave them to adorn your own stables, for you have much flat ground in your kingdom where lotus thrives, as also meadow-sweet and wheat and barley, and oats with their white and spreading ears; whereas in Ithaca we have neither open fields nor racecourses, and the country is more fit for goats than horses, and I like it the better for that.
48 None of our islands have much level ground, suitable for horses, and Ithaca least of all.” Menelaus smiled and took Telemachus’s hand within his own.
“What you say,” said he, “shows that you come of good family.
I both can, and will, make this exchange for you, by giving you the finest and most precious piece of plate in all my house.
It is a mixing bowl by Vulcan’s own hand, of pure silver, except the rim, which is inlaid with gold.
Phaedimus, king of the Sidonians, gave it me in the course of a visit which I paid him when I returned thither on my homeward journey.
I will make you a present of it.” Thus did they converse [and guests kept coming to the king’s house.
They brought sheep and wine, while their wives had put up bread for them to take with them; so they were busy cooking their dinners in the courts].49 Meanwhile the suitors were throwing discs or aiming with spears at a mark on the levelled ground in front of Ulysses’ house, and were behaving with all their old insolence.
Antinous and Eurymachus, who were their ringleaders and much the foremost among them all, were sitting together when Noemon son of Phronius came up and said to Antinous, “Have we any idea, Antinous, on what day Telemachus returns from Pylos?
He has a ship of mine, and I want it, to cross over to Elis: I have twelve brood mares there with yearling mule foals by their side not yet broken in, and I want to bring one of them over here and break him.” They were astounded when they heard this, for they had made sure that Telemachus had not gone to the city of Neleus.
They thought he was only away somewhere on the farms, and was with the sheep, or with the swineherd; so Antinous said, “When did he go?
Tell me truly, and what young men did he take with him?
Were they freemen or his own bondsmen—for he might manage that too?
Tell me also, did you let him have the ship of your own free will because he asked you, or did he take it without your leave?” “I lent it him,” answered Noemon, “what else could I do when a man of his position said he was in a difficulty, and asked me to oblige him?
I could not possibly refuse.
As for those who went with him they were the best young men we have, and I saw Mentor go on board as captain—or some god who was exactly like him.
I cannot understand it, for I saw Mentor here myself yesterday morning, and yet he was then setting out for Pylos.” Noemon then went back to his father’s house, but Antinous and Eurymachus were very angry.
They told the others to leave off playing, and to come and sit down along with themselves.
When they came, Antinous son of Eupeithes spoke in anger.
His heart was black with rage, and his eyes flashed fire as he said: “Good heavens, this voyage of Telemachus is a very serious matter; we had made sure that it would come to nothing, but the young fellow has got away in spite of us, and with a picked crew too.
He will be giving us trouble presently; may Jove take him before he is full grown.
Find me a ship, therefore, with a crew of twenty men, and I will lie in wait for him in the straits between Ithaca and Samos; he will then rue the day that he set out to try and get news of his father.” Thus did he speak, and the others applauded his saying; they then all of them went inside the buildings.
It was not long ere Penelope came to know what the suitors were plotting; for a man servant, Medon, overheard them from outside the outer court as they were laying their schemes within, and went to tell his mistress.
As he crossed the threshold of her room Penelope said: “Medon, what have the suitors sent you here for?
Is it to tell the maids to leave their master’s business and cook dinner for them?
I wish they may neither woo nor dine henceforward, neither here nor anywhere else, but let this be the very last time, for the waste you all make of my son’s estate.
Did not your fathers tell you when you were children, how good Ulysses had been to them—never doing anything high-handed, nor speaking harshly to anybody?
Kings may say things sometimes, and they may take a fancy to one man and dislike another, but Ulysses never did an unjust thing by anybody—which shows what bad hearts you have, and that there is no such thing as gratitude left in this world.” Then Medon said, “I wish, Madam, that this were all; but they are plotting something much more dreadful now—may heaven frustrate their design.
They are going to try and murder Telemachus as he is coming home from Pylos and Lacedaemon, where he has been to get news of his father.” Then Penelope’s heart sank within her, and for a long time she was speechless; her eyes filled with tears, and she could find no utterance.
At last, however, she said, “Why did my son leave me?
What business had he to go sailing off in ships that make long voyages over the ocean like sea-horses?
Does he want to die without leaving any one behind him to keep up his name?” “I do not know,” answered Medon, “whether some god set him on to it, or whether he went on his own impulse to see if he could find out if his father was dead, or alive and on his way home.” Then he went downstairs again, leaving Penelope in an agony of grief.
There were plenty of seats in the house, but she had no heart for sitting on any one of them; she could only fling herself on the floor of her own room and cry; whereon all the maids in the house, both old and young, gathered round her and began to cry too, till at last in a transport of sorrow she exclaimed, “My dears, heaven has been pleased to try me with more affliction than any other woman of my age and country.
First I lost my brave and lion-hearted husband, who had every good quality under heaven, and whose name was great over all Hellas and middle Argos, and now my darling son is at the mercy of the winds and waves, without my having heard one word about his leaving home.
You hussies, there was not one of you would so much as think of giving me a call out of my bed, though you all of you very well knew when he was starting.
If I had known he meant taking this voyage, he would have had to give it up, no matter how much he was bent upon it, or leave me a corpse behind him—one or other.
Now, however, go some of you and call old Dolius, who was given me by my father on my marriage, and who is my gardener.
Bid him go at once and tell everything to Laertes, who may be able to hit on some plan for enlisting public sympathy on our side, as against those who are trying to exterminate his own race and that of Ulysses.” Then the dear old nurse Euryclea said, “You may kill me, Madam, or let me live on in your house, whichever you please, but I will tell you the real truth.
I knew all about it, and gave him everything he wanted in the way of bread and wine, but he made me take my solemn oath that I would not tell you anything for some ten or twelve days, unless you asked or happened to hear of his having gone, for he did not want you to spoil your beauty by crying.
And now, Madam, wash your face, change your dress, and go upstairs with your maids to offer prayers to Minerva, daughter of Aegis-bearing Jove, for she can save him even though he be in the jaws of death.
Do not trouble Laertes: he has trouble enough already.
Besides, I cannot think that the gods hate the race of the son of Arceisius so much, but there will be a son left to come up after him, and inherit both the house and the fair fields that lie far all round it.” With these words she made her mistress leave off crying, and dried the tears from her eyes.
Penelope washed her face, changed her dress, and went upstairs with her maids.
She then put some bruised barley into a basket and began praying to Minerva.
“Hear me,” she cried, “Daughter of Aegis-bearing Jove, unweariable.
If ever Ulysses while he was here burned you fat thigh bones of sheep or heifer, bear it in mind now as in my favour, and save my darling son from the villainy of the suitors.” She cried aloud as she spoke, and the goddess heard her prayer; meanwhile the suitors were clamorous throughout the covered cloister, and one of them said: “The queen is preparing for her marriage with one or other of us.
Little does she dream that her son has now been doomed to die.” This was what they said, but they did not know what was going to happen.
Then Antinous said, “Comrades, let there be no loud talking, lest some of it get carried inside.
Let us be up and do that in silence, about which we are all of a mind.” He then chose twenty men, and they went down to their ship and to the sea side; they drew the vessel into the water and got her mast and sails inside her; they bound the oars to the thole-pins with twisted thongs of leather, all in due course, and spread the white sails aloft, while their fine servants brought them their armour.
Then they made the ship fast a little way out, came on shore again, got their suppers, and waited till night should fall.
But Penelope lay in her own room upstairs unable to eat or drink, and wondering whether her brave son would escape, or be overpowered by the wicked suitors.
Like a lioness caught in the toils with huntsmen hemming her in on every side she thought and thought till she sank into a slumber, and lay on her bed bereft of thought and motion.
Then Minerva bethought her of another matter, and made a vision in the likeness of Penelope’s sister Iphthime daughter of Icarius who had married Eumelus and lived in Pherae.
She told the vision to go to the house of Ulysses, and to make Penelope leave off crying, so it came into her room by the hole through which the thong went for pulling the door to, and hovered over her head saying, “You are asleep, Penelope: the gods who live at ease will not suffer you to weep and be so sad.
Your son has done them no wrong, so he will yet come back to you.” Penelope, who was sleeping sweetly at the gates of dreamland, answered, “Sister, why have you come here?
You do not come very often, but I suppose that is because you live such a long way off.
Am I, then, to leave off crying and refrain from all the sad thoughts that torture me?
I, who have lost my brave and lion-hearted husband, who had every good quality under heaven, and whose name was great over all Hellas and middle Argos; and now my darling son has gone off on board of a ship—a foolish fellow who has never been used to roughing it, nor to going about among gatherings of men.
I am even more anxious about him than about my husband; I am all in a tremble when I think of him, lest something should happen to him, either from the people among whom he has gone, or by sea, for he has many enemies who are plotting against him, and are bent on killing him before he can return home.” Then the vision said, “Take heart, and be not so much dismayed.
There is one gone with him whom many a man would be glad enough to have stand by his side, I mean Minerva; it is she who has compassion upon you, and who has sent me to bear you this message.” “Then,” said Penelope, “if you are a god or have been sent here by divine commission, tell me also about that other unhappy one—is he still alive, or is he already dead and in the house of Hades?” And the vision said, “I shall not tell you for certain whether he is alive or dead, and there is no use in idle conversation.” Then it vanished through the thong-hole of the door and was dissipated into thin air; but Penelope rose from her sleep refreshed and comforted, so vivid had been her dream.
Meantime the suitors went on board and sailed their ways over the sea, intent on murdering Telemachus.
Now there is a rocky islet called Asteris, of no great size, in mid channel between Ithaca and Samos, and there is a harbour on either side of it where a ship can lie.
Here then the Achaeans placed themselves in ambush.
BOOK V CALYPSO—ULYSSES REACHES SCHERIA ON A RAFT.
And now, as Dawn rose from her couch beside Tithonus—harbinger of light alike to mortals and immortals—the gods met in council and with them, Jove the lord of thunder, who is their king.
Thereon Minerva began to tell them of the many sufferings of Ulysses, for she pitied him away there in the house of the nymph Calypso.
“Father Jove,” said she, “and all you other gods that live in everlasting bliss, I hope there may never be such a thing as a kind and well-disposed ruler any more, nor one who will govern equitably.
I hope they will be all henceforth cruel and unjust, for there is not one of his subjects but has forgotten Ulysses, who ruled them as though he were their father.
There he is, lying in great pain in an island where dwells the nymph Calypso, who will not let him go; and he cannot get back to his own country, for he can find neither ships nor sailors to take him over the sea.
Furthermore, wicked people are now trying to murder his only son Telemachus, who is coming home from Pylos and Lacedaemon, where he has been to see if he can get news of his father.” “What, my dear, are you talking about?” replied her father, “did you not send him there yourself, because you thought it would help Ulysses to get home and punish the suitors?
Besides, you are perfectly able to protect Telemachus, and to see him safely home again, while the suitors have to come hurry-skurrying back without having killed him.” When he had thus spoken, he said to his son Mercury, “Mercury, you are our messenger, go therefore and tell Calypso we have decreed that poor Ulysses is to return home.
He is to be convoyed neither by gods nor men, but after a perilous voyage of twenty days upon a raft he is to reach fertile Scheria,50 the land of the Phaeacians, who are near of kin to the gods, and will honour him as though he were one of ourselves.
They will send him in a ship to his own country, and will give him more bronze and gold and raiment than he would have brought back from Troy, if he had had all his prize money and had got home without disaster.
This is how we have settled that he shall return to his country and his friends.” Thus he spoke, and Mercury, guide and guardian, slayer of Argus, did as he was told.
Forthwith he bound on his glittering golden sandals with which he could fly like the wind over land and sea.
He took the wand with which he seals men’s eyes in sleep or wakes them just as he pleases, and flew holding it in his hand over Pieria; then he swooped down through the firmament till he reached the level of the sea, whose waves he skimmed like a cormorant that flies fishing every hole and corner of the ocean, and drenching its thick plumage in the spray.
He flew and flew over many a weary wave, but when at last he got to the island which was his journey’s end, he left the sea and went on by land till he came to the cave where the nymph Calypso lived.
He found her at home.
There was a large fire burning on the hearth, and one could smell from far the fragrant reek of burning cedar and sandal wood.
As for herself, she was busy at her loom, shooting her golden shuttle through the warp and singing beautifully.
Round her cave there was a thick wood of alder, poplar, and sweet smelling cypress trees, wherein all kinds of great birds had built their nests—owls, hawks, and chattering sea-crows that occupy their business in the waters.
A vine loaded with grapes was trained and grew luxuriantly about the mouth of the cave; there were also four running rills of water in channels cut pretty close together, and turned hither and thither so as to irrigate the beds of violets and luscious herbage over which they flowed.
51 Even a god could not help being charmed with such a lovely spot, so Mercury stood still and looked at it; but when he had admired it sufficiently he went inside the cave.
Calypso knew him at once—for the gods all know each other, no matter how far they live from one another—but Ulysses was not within; he was on the sea-shore as usual, looking out upon the barren ocean with tears in his eyes, groaning and breaking his heart for sorrow.
Calypso gave Mercury a seat and said: “Why have you come to see me, Mercury—honoured, and ever welcome—for you do not visit me often?
Say what you want; I will do it for you at once if I can, and if it can be done at all; but come inside, and let me set refreshment before you.” As she spoke she drew a table loaded with ambrosia beside him and mixed him some red nectar, so Mercury ate and drank till he had had enough, and then said: “We are speaking god and goddess to one another, and you ask me why I have come here, and I will tell you truly as you would have me do.
Jove sent me; it was no doing of mine; who could possibly want to come all this way over the sea where there are no cities full of people to offer me sacrifices or choice hecatombs?
Nevertheless I had to come, for none of us other gods can cross Jove, nor transgress his orders.
He says that you have here the most ill-starred of all those who fought nine years before the city of King Priam and sailed home in the tenth year after having sacked it.
On their way home they sinned against Minerva,52 who raised both wind and waves against them, so that all his brave companions perished, and he alone was carried hither by wind and tide.
Jove says that you are to let this man go at once, for it is decreed that he shall not perish here, far from his own people, but shall return to his house and country and see his friends again.” Calypso trembled with rage when she heard this, “You gods,” she exclaimed, “ought to be ashamed of yourselves.
You are always jealous and hate seeing a goddess take a fancy to a mortal man, and live with him in open matrimony.
So when rosy-fingered Dawn made love to Orion, you precious gods were all of you furious till Diana went and killed him in Ortygia.
So again when Ceres fell in love with Iasion, and yielded to him in a thrice-ploughed fallow field, Jove came to hear of it before so very long and killed Iasion with his thunderbolts.
And now you are angry with me too because I have a man here.
I found the poor creature sitting all alone astride of a keel, for Jove had struck his ship with lightning and sunk it in mid ocean, so that all his crew were drowned, while he himself was driven by wind and waves on to my island.
I got fond of him and cherished him, and had set my heart on making him immortal, so that he should never grow old all his days; still I cannot cross Jove, nor bring his counsels to nothing; therefore, if he insists upon it, let the man go beyond the seas again; but I cannot send him anywhere myself for I have neither ships nor men who can take him.
Nevertheless I will readily give him such advice, in all good faith, as will be likely to bring him safely to his own country.” “Then send him away,” said Mercury, “or Jove will be angry with you and punish you”.
On this he took his leave, and Calypso went out to look for Ulysses, for she had heard Jove’s message.
She found him sitting upon the beach with his eyes ever filled with tears, and dying of sheer home sickness; for he had got tired of Calypso, and though he was forced to sleep with her in the cave by night, it was she, not he, that would have it so.
As for the day time, he spent it on the rocks and on the sea shore, weeping, crying aloud for his despair, and always looking out upon the sea.
Calypso then went close up to him said: “My poor fellow, you shall not stay here grieving and fretting your life out any longer.
I am going to send you away of my own free will; so go, cut some beams of wood, and make yourself a large raft with an upper deck that it may carry you safely over the sea.
I will put bread, wine, and water on board to save you from starving.
I will also give you clothes, and will send you a fair wind to take you home, if the gods in heaven so will it—for they know more about these things, and can settle them better than I can.” Ulysses shuddered as he heard her.
“Now goddess,” he answered, “there is something behind all this; you cannot be really meaning to help me home when you bid me do such a dreadful thing as put to sea on a raft.
Not even a well found ship with a fair wind could venture on such a distant voyage: nothing that you can say or do shall make me go on board a raft unless you first solemnly swear that you mean me no mischief.” Calypso smiled at this and caressed him with her hand: “You know a great deal,” said she, “but you are quite wrong here.
May heaven above and earth below be my witnesses, with the waters of the river Styx—and this is the most solemn oath which a blessed god can take—that I mean you no sort of harm, and am only advising you to do exactly what I should do myself in your place.
I am dealing with you quite straightforwardly; my heart is not made of iron, and I am very sorry for you.” When she had thus spoken she led the way rapidly before him, and Ulysses followed in her steps; so the pair, goddess and man, went on and on till they came to Calypso’s cave, where Ulysses took the seat that Mercury had just left.
Calypso set meat and drink before him of the food that mortals eat; but her maids brought ambrosia and nectar for herself, and they laid their hands on the good things that were before them.
When they had satisfied themselves with meat and drink, Calypso spoke, saying: “Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, so you would start home to your own land at once?
Good luck go with you, but if you could only know how much suffering is in store for you before you get back to your own country, you would stay where you are, keep house along with me, and let me make you immortal, no matter how anxious you may be to see this wife of yours, of whom you are thinking all the time day after day; yet I flatter myself that I am no whit less tall or well-looking than she is, for it is not to be expected that a mortal woman should compare in beauty with an immortal.” “Goddess,” replied Ulysses, “do not be angry with me about this.
I am quite aware that my wife Penelope is nothing like so tall or so beautiful as yourself.
She is only a woman, whereas you are an immortal.
Nevertheless, I want to get home, and can think of nothing else.
If some god wrecks me when I am on the sea, I will bear it and make the best of it.
I have had infinite trouble both by land and sea already, so let this go with the rest.” Presently the sun set and it became dark, whereon the pair retired into the inner part of the cave and went to bed.
When the child of morning rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, Ulysses put on his shirt and cloak, while the goddess wore a dress of a light gossamer fabric, very fine and graceful, with a beautiful golden girdle about her waist and a veil to cover her head.
She at once set herself to think how she could speed Ulysses on his way.
So she gave him a great bronze axe that suited his hands; it was sharpened on both sides, and had a beautiful olive-wood handle fitted firmly on to it.
She also gave him a sharp adze, and then led the way to the far end of the island where the largest trees grew—alder, poplar and pine, that reached the sky—very dry and well seasoned, so as to sail light for him in the water.53 Then, when she had shown him where the best trees grew, Calypso went home, leaving him to cut them, which he soon finished doing.
He cut down twenty trees in all and adzed them smooth, squaring them by rule in good workmanlike fashion.
Meanwhile Calypso came back with some augers, so he bored holes with them and fitted the timbers together with bolts and rivets.
He made the raft as broad as a skilled shipwright makes the beam of a large vessel, and he fixed a deck on top of the ribs, and ran a gunwale all round it.
He also made a mast with a yard arm, and a rudder to steer with.
He fenced the raft all round with wicker hurdles as a protection against the waves, and then he threw on a quantity of wood.
By and by Calypso brought him some linen to make the sails, and he made these too, excellently, making them fast with braces and sheets.
Last of all, with the help of levers, he drew the raft down into the water.
In four days he had completed the whole work, and on the fifth Calypso sent him from the island after washing him and giving him some clean clothes.
She gave him a goat skin full of black wine, and another larger one of water; she also gave him a wallet full of provisions, and found him in much good meat.
Moreover, she made the wind fair and warm for him, and gladly did Ulysses spread his sail before it, while he sat and guided the raft skilfully by means of the rudder.
He never closed his eyes, but kept them fixed on the Pleiads, on late-setting Bootes, and on the Bear—which men also call the wain, and which turns round and round where it is, facing Orion, and alone never dipping into the stream of Oceanus—for Calypso had told him to keep this to his left.
Days seven and ten did he sail over the sea, and on the eighteenth the dim outlines of the mountains on the nearest part of the Phaeacian coast appeared, rising like a shield on the horizon.
But King Neptune, who was returning from the Ethiopians, caught sight of Ulysses a long way off, from the mountains of the Solymi.
He could see him sailing upon the sea, and it made him very angry, so he wagged his head and muttered to himself, saying, “Good heavens, so the gods have been changing their minds about Ulysses while I was away in Ethiopia, and now he is close to the land of the Phaeacians, where it is decreed that he shall escape from the calamities that have befallen him.
Still, he shall have plenty of hardship yet before he has done with it.” Thereon he gathered his clouds together, grasped his trident, stirred it round in the sea, and roused the rage of every wind that blows till earth, sea, and sky were hidden in cloud, and night sprang forth out of the heavens.
Winds from East, South, North, and West fell upon him all at the same time, and a tremendous sea got up, so that Ulysses’ heart began to fail him.
“Alas,” he said to himself in his dismay, “what ever will become of me?
I am afraid Calypso was right when she said I should have trouble by sea before I got back home.
It is all coming true.
How black is Jove making heaven with his clouds, and what a sea the winds are raising from every quarter at once.
I am now safe to perish.
Blest and thrice blest were those Danaans who fell before Troy in the cause of the sons of Atreus.
Would that I had been killed on the day when the Trojans were pressing me so sorely about the dead body of Achilles, for then I should have had due burial and the Achaeans would have honoured my name; but now it seems that I shall come to a most pitiable end.” As he spoke a sea broke over him with such terrific fury that the raft reeled again, and he was carried overboard a long way off.
He let go the helm, and the force of the hurricane was so great that it broke the mast half way up, and both sail and yard went over into the sea.
For a long time Ulysses was under water, and it was all he could do to rise to the surface again, for the clothes Calypso had given him weighed him down; but at last he got his head above water and spat out the bitter brine that was running down his face in streams.
In spite of all this, however, he did not lose sight of his raft, but swam as fast as he could towards it, got hold of it, and climbed on board again so as to escape drowning.
The sea took the raft and tossed it about as Autumn winds whirl thistledown round and round upon a road.
It was as though the South, North, East, and West winds were all playing battledore and shuttlecock with it at once.
When he was in this plight, Ino daughter of Cadmus, also called Leucothea, saw him.
She had formerly been a mere mortal, but had been since raised to the rank of a marine goddess.
Seeing in what great distress Ulysses now was, she had compassion upon him, and, rising like a sea-gull from the waves, took her seat upon the raft.
“My poor good man,” said she, “why is Neptune so furiously angry with you?
He is giving you a great deal of trouble, but for all his bluster he will not kill you.
You seem to be a sensible person, do then as I bid you; strip, leave your raft to drive before the wind, and swim to the Phaeacian coast where better luck awaits you.
And here, take my veil and put it round your chest; it is enchanted, and you can come to no harm so long as you wear it.
As soon as you touch land take it off, throw it back as far as you can into the sea, and then go away again.” With these words she took off her veil and gave it him.
Then she dived down again like a sea-gull and vanished beneath the dark blue waters.
But Ulysses did not know what to think.
“Alas,” he said to himself in his dismay, “this is only some one or other of the gods who is luring me to ruin by advising me to quit my raft.
At any rate I will not do so at present, for the land where she said I should be quit of all troubles seemed to be still a good way off.
I know what I will do—I am sure it will be best—no matter what happens I will stick to the raft as long as her timbers hold together, but when the sea breaks her up I will swim for it; I do not see how I can do any better than this.” While he was thus in two minds, Neptune sent a terrible great wave that seemed to rear itself above his head till it broke right over the raft, which then went to pieces as though it were a heap of dry chaff tossed about by a whirlwind.
Ulysses got astride of one plank and rode upon it as if he were on horseback; he then took off the clothes Calypso had given him, bound Ino’s veil under his arms, and plunged into the sea—meaning to swim on shore.
King Neptune watched him as he did so, and wagged his head, muttering to himself and saying, “There now, swim up and down as you best can till you fall in with well-to-do people.
I do not think you will be able to say that I have let you off too lightly.” On this he lashed his horses and drove to Aegae where his palace is.
But Minerva resolved to help Ulysses, so she bound the ways of all the winds except one, and made them lie quite still; but she roused a good stiff breeze from the North that should lay the waters till Ulysses reached the land of the Phaeacians where he would be safe.
Thereon he floated about for two nights and two days in the water, with a heavy swell on the sea and death staring him in the face; but when the third day broke, the wind fell and there was a dead calm without so much as a breath of air stirring.
As he rose on the swell he looked eagerly ahead, and could see land quite near.
Then, as children rejoice when their dear father begins to get better after having for a long time borne sore affliction sent him by some angry spirit, but the gods deliver him from evil, so was Ulysses thankful when he again saw land and trees, and swam on with all his strength that he might once more set foot upon dry ground.
When, however, he got within earshot, he began to hear the surf thundering up against the rocks, for the swell still broke against them with a terrific roar.
Everything was enveloped in spray; there were no harbours where a ship might ride, nor shelter of any kind, but only headlands, low-lying rocks, and mountain tops.
Ulysses’ heart now began to fail him, and he said despairingly to himself, “Alas, Jove has let me see land after swimming so far that I had given up all hope, but I can find no landing place, for the coast is rocky and surf-beaten, the rocks are smooth and rise sheer from the sea, with deep water close under them so that I cannot climb out for want of foot hold.
I am afraid some great wave will lift me off my legs and dash me against the rocks as I leave the water—which would give me a sorry landing.
If, on the other hand, I swim further in search of some shelving beach or harbour, a hurricane may carry me out to sea again sorely against my will, or heaven may send some great monster of the deep to attack me; for Amphitrite breeds many such, and I know that Neptune is very angry with me.” While he was thus in two minds a wave caught him and took him with such force against the rocks that he would have been smashed and torn to pieces if Minerva had not shown him what to do.
He caught hold of the rock with both hands and clung to it groaning with pain till the wave retired, so he was saved that time; but presently the wave came on again and carried him back with it far into the sea—tearing his hands as the suckers of a polypus are torn when some one plucks it from its bed, and the stones come up along with it—even so did the rocks tear the skin from his strong hands, and then the wave drew him deep down under the water.
Here poor Ulysses would have certainly perished even in spite of his own destiny, if Minerva had not helped him to keep his wits about him.
He swam seaward again, beyond reach of the surf that was beating against the land, and at the same time he kept looking towards the shore to see if he could find some haven, or a spit that should take the waves aslant.
By and by, as he swam on, he came to the mouth of a river, and here he thought would be the best place, for there were no rocks, and it afforded shelter from the wind.
He felt that there was a current, so he prayed inwardly and said: “Hear me, O King, whoever you may be, and save me from the anger of the sea-god Neptune, for I approach you prayerfully.
Any one who has lost his way has at all times a claim even upon the gods, wherefore in my distress I draw near to your stream, and cling to the knees of your riverhood.
Have mercy upon me, O king, for I declare myself your suppliant.” Then the god staid his stream and stilled the waves, making all calm before him, and bringing him safely into the mouth of the river.
Here at last Ulysses’ knees and strong hands failed him, for the sea had completely broken him.
His body was all swollen, and his mouth and nostrils ran down like a river with sea-water, so that he could neither breathe nor speak, and lay swooning from sheer exhaustion; presently, when he had got his breath and came to himself again, he took off the scarf that Ino had given him and threw it back into the salt54 stream of the river, whereon Ino received it into her hands from the wave that bore it towards her.
Then he left the river, laid himself down among the rushes, and kissed the bounteous earth.
“Alas,” he cried to himself in his dismay, “what ever will become of me, and how is it all to end?
If I stay here upon the river bed through the long watches of the night, I am so exhausted that the bitter cold and damp may make an end of me—for towards sunrise there will be a keen wind blowing from off the river.
If, on the other hand, I climb the hill side, find shelter in the woods, and sleep in some thicket, I may escape the cold and have a good night’s rest, but some savage beast may take advantage of me and devour me.” In the end he deemed it best to take to the woods, and he found one upon some high ground not far from the water.
There he crept beneath two shoots of olive that grew from a single stock—the one an ungrafted sucker, while the other had been grafted.
No wind, however squally, could break through the cover they afforded, nor could the sun’s rays pierce them, nor the rain get through them, so closely did they grow into one another.
Ulysses crept under these and began to make himself a bed to lie on, for there was a great litter of dead leaves lying about—enough to make a covering for two or three men even in hard winter weather.
He was glad enough to see this, so he laid himself down and heaped the leaves all round him.
Then, as one who lives alone in the country, far from any neighbor, hides a brand as fire-seed in the ashes to save himself from having to get a light elsewhere, even so did Ulysses cover himself up with leaves; and Minerva shed a sweet sleep upon his eyes, closed his eyelids, and made him lose all memories of his sorrows.
BOOK VI THE MEETING BETWEEN NAUSICAA AND ULYSSES.
So here Ulysses slept, overcome by sleep and toil; but Minerva went off to the country and city of the Phaeacians—a people who used to live in the fair town of Hypereia, near the lawless Cyclopes.
Now the Cyclopes were stronger than they and plundered them, so their king Nausithous moved them thence and settled them in Scheria, far from all other people.
He surrounded the city with a wall, built houses and temples, and divided the lands among his people; but he was dead and gone to the house of Hades, and King Alcinous, whose counsels were inspired of heaven, was now reigning.
To his house, then, did Minerva hie in furtherance of the return of Ulysses.
She went straight to the beautifully decorated bedroom in which there slept a girl who was as lovely as a goddess, Nausicaa, daughter to King Alcinous.
Two maid servants were sleeping near her, both very pretty, one on either side of the doorway, which was closed with well made folding doors.
Minerva took the form of the famous sea captain Dymas’s daughter, who was a bosom friend of Nausicaa and just her own age; then, coming up to the girl’s bedside like a breath of wind, she hovered over her head and said: “Nausicaa, what can your mother have been about, to have such a lazy daughter?
Here are your clothes all lying in disorder, yet you are going to be married almost immediately, and should not only be well dressed yourself, but should find good clothes for those who attend you.
This is the way to get yourself a good name, and to make your father and mother proud of you.
Suppose, then, that we make tomorrow a washing day, and start at daybreak.
I will come and help you so that you may have everything ready as soon as possible, for all the best young men among your own people are courting you, and you are not going to remain a maid much longer.
Ask your father, therefore, to have a waggon and mules ready for us at daybreak, to take the rugs, robes, and girdles, and you can ride, too, which will be much pleasanter for you than walking, for the washing-cisterns are some way from the town.” When she had said this Minerva went away to Olympus, which they say is the everlasting home of the gods.
Here no wind beats roughly, and neither rain nor snow can fall; but it abides in everlasting sunshine and in a great peacefulness of light, wherein the blessed gods are illumined for ever and ever.
This was the place to which the goddess went when she had given instructions to the girl.
By and by morning came and woke Nausicaa, who began wondering about her dream; she therefore went to the other end of the house to tell her father and mother all about it, and found them in their own room.
Her mother was sitting by the fireside spinning her purple yarn with her maids around her, and she happened to catch her father just as he was going out to attend a meeting of the town council, which the Phaeacian aldermen had convened.
She stopped him and said: “Papa dear, could you manage to let me have a good big waggon?
I want to take all our dirty clothes to the river and wash them.
You are the chief man here, so it is only right that you should have a clean shirt when you attend meetings of the council.
Moreover, you have five sons at home, two of them married, while the other three are good looking bachelors; you know they always like to have clean linen when they go to a dance, and I have been thinking about all this.” She did not say a word about her own wedding, for she did not like to, but her father knew and said, “You shall have the mules, my love, and whatever else you have a mind for.
Be off with you, and the men shall get you a good strong waggon with a body to it that will hold all your clothes.” On this he gave his orders to the servants, who got the waggon out, harnessed the mules, and put them to, while the girl brought the clothes down from the linen room and placed them on the waggon.
Her mother prepared her a basket of provisions with all sorts of good things, and a goat skin full of wine; the girl now got into the waggon, and her mother gave her also a golden cruse of oil, that she and her women might anoint themselves.
Then she took the whip and reins and lashed the mules on, whereon they set off, and their hoofs clattered on the road.
They pulled without flagging, and carried not only Nausicaa and her wash of clothes, but the maids also who were with her.
When they reached the water side they went to the washing cisterns, through which there ran at all times enough pure water to wash any quantity of linen, no matter how dirty.
Here they unharnessed the mules and turned them out to feed on the sweet juicy herbage that grew by the water side.
They took the clothes out of the waggon, put them in the water, and vied with one another in treading them in the pits to get the dirt out.
After they had washed them and got them quite clean, they laid them out by the sea side, where the waves had raised a high beach of shingle, and set about washing themselves and anointing themselves with olive oil.
Then they got their dinner by the side of the stream, and waited for the sun to finish drying the clothes.
When they had done dinner they threw off the veils that covered their heads and began to play at ball, while Nausicaa sang for them.
As the huntress Diana goes forth upon the mountains of Taygetus or Erymanthus to hunt wild boars or deer, and the wood nymphs, daughters of Aegis-bearing Jove, take their sport along with her (then is Leto proud at seeing her daughter stand a full head taller than the others, and eclipse the loveliest amid a whole bevy of beauties), even so did the girl outshine her handmaids.
When it was time for them to start home, and they were folding the clothes and putting them into the waggon, Minerva began to consider how Ulysses should wake up and see the handsome girl who was to conduct him to the city of the Phaeacians.
The girl, therefore, threw a ball at one of the maids, which missed her and fell into deep water.
On this they all shouted, and the noise they made woke Ulysses, who sat up in his bed of leaves and began to wonder what it might all be.
“Alas,” said he to himself, “what kind of people have I come amongst?
Are they cruel, savage, and uncivilised, or hospitable and humane?
I seem to hear the voices of young women, and they sound like those of the nymphs that haunt mountain tops, or springs of rivers and meadows of green grass.
At any rate I am among a race of men and women.
Let me try if I cannot manage to get a look at them.” As he said this he crept from under his bush, and broke off a bough covered with thick leaves to hide his nakedness.
He looked like some lion of the wilderness that stalks about exulting in his strength and defying both wind and rain; his eyes glare as he prowls in quest of oxen, sheep, or deer, for he is famished, and will dare break even into a well fenced homestead, trying to get at the sheep—even such did Ulysses seem to the young women, as he drew near to them all naked as he was, for he was in great want.
On seeing one so unkempt and so begrimed with salt water, the others scampered off along the spits that jutted out into the sea, but the daughter of Alcinous stood firm, for Minerva put courage into her heart and took away all fear from her.
She stood right in front of Ulysses, and he doubted whether he should go up to her, throw himself at her feet, and embrace her knees as a suppliant, or stay where he was and entreat her to give him some clothes and show him the way to the town.
In the end he deemed it best to entreat her from a distance in case the girl should take offence at his coming near enough to clasp her knees, so he addressed her in honeyed and persuasive language.
“O queen,” he said, “I implore your aid—but tell me, are you a goddess or are you a mortal woman?
If you are a goddess and dwell in heaven, I can only conjecture that you are Jove’s daughter Diana, for your face and figure resemble none but hers; if on the other hand you are a mortal and live on earth, thrice happy are your father and mother—thrice happy, too, are your brothers and sisters; how proud and delighted they must feel when they see so fair a scion as yourself going out to a dance; most happy, however, of all will he be whose wedding gifts have been the richest, and who takes you to his own home.
I never yet saw any one so beautiful, neither man nor woman, and am lost in admiration as I behold you.
I can only compare you to a young palm tree which I saw when I was at Delos growing near the altar of Apollo—for I was there, too, with much people after me, when I was on that journey which has been the source of all my troubles.
Never yet did such a young plant shoot out of the ground as that was, and I admired and wondered at it exactly as I now admire and wonder at yourself.
I dare not clasp your knees, but I am in great distress; yesterday made the twentieth day that I had been tossing about upon the sea.
The winds and waves have taken me all the way from the Ogygian island,55 and now fate has flung me upon this coast that I may endure still further suffering; for I do not think that I have yet come to the end of it, but rather that heaven has still much evil in store for me.
“And now, O queen, have pity upon me, for you are the first person I have met, and I know no one else in this country.
Show me the way to your town, and let me have anything that you may have brought hither to wrap your clothes in.
May heaven grant you in all things your heart’s desire—husband, house, and a happy, peaceful home; for there is nothing better in this world than that man and wife should be of one mind in a house.
It discomfits their enemies, makes the hearts of their friends glad, and they themselves know more about it than any one.” To this Nausicaa answered, “Stranger, you appear to be a sensible, well-disposed person.
There is no accounting for luck; Jove gives prosperity to rich and poor just as he chooses, so you must take what he has seen fit to send you, and make the best of it.
Now, however, that you have come to this our country, you shall not want for clothes nor for anything else that a foreigner in distress may reasonably look for.
I will show you the way to the town, and will tell you the name of our people; we are called Phaeacians, and I am daughter to Alcinous, in whom the whole power of the state is vested.” Then she called her maids and said, “Stay where you are, you girls.
Can you not see a man without running away from him?
Do you take him for a robber or a murderer?
Neither he nor any one else can come here to do us Phaeacians any harm, for we are dear to the gods, and live apart on a land’s end that juts into the sounding sea, and have nothing to do with any other people.
This is only some poor man who has lost his way, and we must be kind to him, for strangers and foreigners in distress are under Jove’s protection, and will take what they can get and be thankful; so, girls, give the poor fellow something to eat and drink, and wash him in the stream at some place that is sheltered from the wind.” On this the maids left off running away and began calling one another back.
They made Ulysses sit down in the shelter as Nausicaa had told them, and brought him a shirt and cloak.
They also brought him the little golden cruse of oil, and told him to go and wash in the stream.
But Ulysses said, “Young women, please to stand a little on one side that I may wash the brine from my shoulders and anoint myself with oil, for it is long enough since my skin has had a drop of oil upon it.
I cannot wash as long as you all keep standing there.
I am ashamed to strip56 before a number of good looking young women.” Then they stood on one side and went to tell the girl, while Ulysses washed himself in the stream and scrubbed the brine from his back and from his broad shoulders.
When he had thoroughly washed himself, and had got the brine out of his hair, he anointed himself with oil, and put on the clothes which the girl had given him; Minerva then made him look taller and stronger than before, she also made the hair grow thick on the top of his head, and flow down in curls like hyacinth blossoms; she glorified him about the head and shoulders as a skilful workman who has studied art of all kinds under Vulcan and Minerva enriches a piece of silver plate by gilding it—and his work is full of beauty.
Then he went and sat down a little way off upon the beach, looking quite young and handsome, and the girl gazed on him with admiration; then she said to her maids: “Hush, my dears, for I want to say something.
I believe the gods who live in heaven have sent this man to the Phaeacians.
When I first saw him I thought him plain, but now his appearance is like that of the gods who dwell in heaven.
I should like my future husband to be just such another as he is, if he would only stay here and not want to go away.
However, give him something to eat and drink.” They did as they were told, and set food before Ulysses, who ate and drank ravenously, for it was long since he had had food of any kind.
Meanwhile, Nausicaa bethought her of another matter.
She got the linen folded and placed in the waggon, she then yoked the mules, and, as she took her seat, she called Ulysses: “Stranger,” said she, “rise and let us be going back to the town; I will introduce you at the house of my excellent father, where I can tell you that you will meet all the best people among the Phaeacians.
But be sure and do as I bid you, for you seem to be a sensible person.
As long as we are going past the fields and farm lands, follow briskly behind the waggon along with the maids and I will lead the way myself.
Presently, however, we shall come to the town, where you will find a high wall running all round it, and a good harbour on either side with a narrow entrance into the city, and the ships will be drawn up by the road side, for every one has a place where his own ship can lie.
You will see the market place with a temple of Neptune in the middle of it, and paved with large stones bedded in the earth.
Here people deal in ship’s gear of all kinds, such as cables and sails, and here, too, are the places where oars are made, for the Phaeacians are not a nation of archers; they know nothing about bows and arrows, but are a sea-faring folk, and pride themselves on their masts, oars, and ships, with which they travel far over the sea.
“I am afraid of the gossip and scandal that may be set on foot against me later on; for the people here are very ill-natured, and some low fellow, if he met us, might say, ‘Who is this fine-looking stranger that is going about with Nausicaa?
Where did she find him?
I suppose she is going to marry him.
Perhaps he is a vagabond sailor whom she has taken from some foreign vessel, for we have no neighbours; or some god has at last come down from heaven in answer to her prayers, and she is going to live with him all the rest of her life.
It would be a good thing if she would take herself off and find a husband somewhere else, for she will not look at one of the many excellent young Phaeacians who are in love with her.’ This is the kind of disparaging remark that would be made about me, and I could not complain, for I should myself be scandalised at seeing any other girl do the like, and go about with men in spite of everybody, while her father and mother were still alive, and without having been married in the face of all the world.
“If, therefore, you want my father to give you an escort and to help you home, do as I bid you; you will see a beautiful grove of poplars by the road side dedicated to Minerva; it has a well in it and a meadow all round it.
Here my father has a field of rich garden ground, about as far from the town as a man’s voice will carry.
Sit down there and wait for a while till the rest of us can get into the town and reach my father’s house.
Then, when you think we must have done this, come into the town and ask the way to the house of my father Alcinous.
You will have no difficulty in finding it; any child will point it out to you, for no one else in the whole town has anything like such a fine house as he has.
When you have got past the gates and through the outer court, go right across the inner court till you come to my mother.
You will find her sitting by the fire and spinning her purple wool by firelight.
It is a fine sight to see her as she leans back against one of the bearing-posts with her maids all ranged behind her.
Close to her seat stands that of my father, on which he sits and topes like an immortal god.
Never mind him, but go up to my mother, and lay your hands upon her knees if you would get home quickly.
If you can gain her over, you may hope to see your own country again, no matter how distant it may be.” So saying she lashed the mules with her whip and they left the river.
The mules drew well, and their hoofs went up and down upon the road.
She was careful not to go too fast for Ulysses and the maids who were following on foot along with the waggon, so she plied her whip with judgement.
As the sun was going down they came to the sacred grove of Minerva, and there Ulysses sat down and prayed to the mighty daughter of Jove.
“Hear me,” he cried, “daughter of Aegis-bearing Jove, unweariable, hear me now, for you gave no heed to my prayers when Neptune was wrecking me.
Now, therefore, have pity upon me and grant that I may find friends and be hospitably received by the Phaeacians.” Thus did he pray, and Minerva heard his prayer, but she would not show herself to him openly, for she was afraid of her uncle Neptune, who was still furious in his endeavors to prevent Ulysses from getting home.
BOOK VII RECEPTION OF ULYSSES AT THE PALACE OF KING ALCINOUS.
Thus, then, did Ulysses wait and pray; but the girl drove on to the town.
When she reached her father’s house she drew up at the gateway, and her brothers—comely as the gods—gathered round her, took the mules out of the waggon, and carried the clothes into the house, while she went to her own room, where an old servant, Eurymedusa of Apeira, lit the fire for her.
This old woman had been brought by sea from Apeira, and had been chosen as a prize for Alcinous because he was king over the Phaeacians, and the people obeyed him as though he were a god.57 She had been nurse to Nausicaa, and had now lit the fire for her, and brought her supper for her into her own room.
Presently Ulysses got up to go towards the town; and Minerva shed a thick mist all round him to hide him in case any of the proud Phaeacians who met him should be rude to him, or ask him who he was.
Then, as he was just entering the town, she came towards him in the likeness of a little girl carrying a pitcher.
She stood right in front of him, and Ulysses said: “My dear, will you be so kind as to show me the house of king Alcinous?
I am an unfortunate foreigner in distress, and do not know one in your town and country.” Then Minerva said, “Yes, father stranger, I will show you the house you want, for Alcinous lives quite close to my own father.
I will go before you and show the way, but say not a word as you go, and do not look at any man, nor ask him questions; for the people here cannot abide strangers, and do not like men who come from some other place.
They are a sea-faring folk, and sail the seas by the grace of Neptune in ships that glide along like thought, or as a bird in the air.” On this she led the way, and Ulysses followed in her steps; but not one of the Phaeacians could see him as he passed through the city in the midst of them; for the great goddess Minerva in her good will towards him had hidden him in a thick cloud of darkness.
He admired their harbours, ships, places of assembly, and the lofty walls of the city, which, with the palisade on top of them, were very striking, and when they reached the king’s house Minerva said: “This is the house, father stranger, which you would have me show you.
You will find a number of great people sitting at table, but do not be afraid; go straight in, for the bolder a man is the more likely he is to carry his point, even though he is a stranger.
First find the queen.
Her name is Arete, and she comes of the same family as her husband Alcinous.
They both descend originally from Neptune, who was father to Nausithous by Periboea, a woman of great beauty.
Periboea was the youngest daughter of Eurymedon, who at one time reigned over the giants, but he ruined his ill-fated people and lost his own life to boot.
“Neptune, however, lay with his daughter, and she had a son by him, the great Nausithous, who reigned over the Phaeacians.
Nausithous had two sons Rhexenor and Alcinous;58 Apollo killed the first of them while he was still a bridegroom and without male issue; but he left a daughter Arete, whom Alcinous married, and honours as no other woman is honoured of all those that keep house along with their husbands.
“Thus she both was, and still is, respected beyond measure by her children, by Alcinous himself, and by the whole people, who look upon her as a goddess, and greet her whenever she goes about the city, for she is a thoroughly good woman both in head and heart, and when any women are friends of hers, she will help their husbands also to settle their disputes.
If you can gain her good will, you may have every hope of seeing your friends again, and getting safely back to your home and country.” Then Minerva left Scheria and went away over the sea.
She went to Marathon59 and to the spacious streets of Athens, where she entered the abode of Erechtheus; but Ulysses went on to the house of Alcinous, and he pondered much as he paused a while before reaching the threshold of bronze, for the splendour of the palace was like that of the sun or moon.
The walls on either side were of bronze from end to end, and the cornice was of blue enamel.
The doors were gold, and hung on pillars of silver that rose from a floor of bronze, while the lintel was silver and the hook of the door was of gold.
On either side there stood gold and silver mastiffs which Vulcan, with his consummate skill, had fashioned expressly to keep watch over the palace of king Alcinous; so they were immortal and could never grow old.
Seats were ranged all along the wall, here and there from one end to the other, with coverings of fine woven work which the women of the house had made.
Here the chief persons of the Phaeacians used to sit and eat and drink, for there was abundance at all seasons; and there were golden figures of young men with lighted torches in their hands, raised on pedestals, to give light by night to those who were at table.
There are60 fifty maid servants in the house, some of whom are always grinding rich yellow grain at the mill, while others work at the loom, or sit and spin, and their shuttles go backwards and forwards like the fluttering of aspen leaves, while the linen is so closely woven that it will turn oil.
As the Phaeacians are the best sailors in the world, so their women excel all others in weaving, for Minerva has taught them all manner of useful arts, and they are very intelligent.
Outside the gate of the outer court there is a large garden of about four acres with a wall all round it.
It is full of beautiful trees—pears, pomegranates, and the most delicious apples.
There are luscious figs also, and olives in full growth.
The fruits never rot nor fail all the year round, neither winter nor summer, for the air is so soft that a new crop ripens before the old has dropped.
Pear grows on pear, apple on apple, and fig on fig, and so also with the grapes, for there is an excellent vineyard: on the level ground of a part of this, the grapes are being made into raisins; in another part they are being gathered; some are being trodden in the wine tubs, others further on have shed their blossom and are beginning to show fruit, others again are just changing colour.
In the furthest part of the ground there are beautifully arranged beds of flowers that are in bloom all the year round.
Two streams go through it, the one turned in ducts throughout the whole garden, while the other is carried under the ground of the outer court to the house itself, and the town’s people draw water from it.
Such, then, were the splendours with which the gods had endowed the house of king Alcinous.
So here Ulysses stood for a while and looked about him, but when he had looked long enough he crossed the threshold and went within the precincts of the house.
There he found all the chief people among the Phaeacians making their drink offerings to Mercury, which they always did the last thing before going away for the night.61 He went straight through the court, still hidden by the cloak of darkness in which Minerva had enveloped him, till he reached Arete and King Alcinous; then he laid his hands upon the knees of the queen, and at that moment the miraculous darkness fell away from him and he became visible.
Every one was speechless with surprise at seeing a man there, but Ulysses began at once with his petition.
“Queen Arete,” he exclaimed, “daughter of great Rhexenor, in my distress I humbly pray you, as also your husband and these your guests (whom may heaven prosper with long life and happiness, and may they leave their possessions to their children, and all the honours conferred upon them by the state) to help me home to my own country as soon as possible; for I have been long in trouble and away from my friends.” Then he sat down on the hearth among the ashes and they all held their peace, till presently the old hero Echeneus, who was an excellent speaker and an elder among the Phaeacians, plainly and in all honesty addressed them thus: “Alcinous,” said he, “it is not creditable to you that a stranger should be seen sitting among the ashes of your hearth; every one is waiting to hear what you are about to say; tell him, then, to rise and take a seat on a stool inlaid with silver, and bid your servants mix some wine and water that we may make a drink offering to Jove the lord of thunder, who takes all well disposed suppliants under his protection; and let the housekeeper give him some supper, of whatever there may be in the house.” When Alcinous heard this he took Ulysses by the hand, raised him from the hearth, and bade him take the seat of Laodamas, who had been sitting beside him, and was his favourite son.
A maid servant then brought him water in a beautiful golden ewer and poured it into a silver basin for him to wash his hands, and she drew a clean table beside him; an upper servant brought him bread and offered him many good things of what there was in the house, and Ulysses ate and drank.
Then Alcinous said to one of the servants, “Pontonous, mix a cup of wine and hand it round that we may make drink-offerings to Jove the lord of thunder, who is the protector of all well-disposed suppliants.” Pontonous then mixed wine and water, and handed it round after giving every man his drink-offering.
When they had made their offerings, and had drunk each as much as he was minded, Alcinous said: “Aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians, hear my words.
You have had your supper, so now go home to bed.
To-morrow morning I shall invite a still larger number of aldermen, and will give a sacrificial banquet in honour of our guest; we can then discuss the question of his escort, and consider how we may at once send him back rejoicing to his own country without trouble or inconvenience to himself, no matter how distant it may be.
We must see that he comes to no harm while on his homeward journey, but when he is once at home he will have to take the luck he was born with for better or worse like other people.
It is possible, however, that the stranger is one of the immortals who has come down from heaven to visit us; but in this case the gods are departing from their usual practice, for hitherto they have made themselves perfectly clear to us when we have been offering them hecatombs.
They come and sit at our feasts just like one of our selves, and if any solitary wayfarer happens to stumble upon some one or other of them, they affect no concealment, for we are as near of kin to the gods as the Cyclopes and the savage giants are.”62 Then Ulysses said: “Pray, Alcinous, do not take any such notion into your head.
I have nothing of the immortal about me, neither in body nor mind, and most resemble those among you who are the most afflicted.
Indeed, were I to tell you all that heaven has seen fit to lay upon me, you would say that I was still worse off than they are.
Nevertheless, let me sup in spite of sorrow, for an empty stomach is a very importunate thing, and thrusts itself on a man’s notice no matter how dire is his distress.
I am in great trouble, yet it insists that I shall eat and drink, bids me lay aside all memory of my sorrows and dwell only on the due replenishing of itself.
As for yourselves, do as you propose, and at break of day set about helping me to get home.
I shall be content to die if I may first once more behold my property, my bondsmen, and all the greatness of my house.”63 Thus did he speak.
Every one approved his saying, and agreed that he should have his escort inasmuch as he had spoken reasonably.
Then when they had made their drink offerings, and had drunk each as much as he was minded they went home to bed every man in his own abode, leaving Ulysses in the cloister with Arete and Alcinous while the servants were taking the things away after supper.
Arete was the first to speak, for she recognised the shirt, cloak, and good clothes that Ulysses was wearing, as the work of herself and of her maids; so she said, “Stranger, before we go any further, there is a question I should like to ask you.
Who, and whence are you, and who gave you those clothes?
Did you not say you had come here from beyond the sea?” And Ulysses answered, “It would be a long story Madam, were I to relate in full the tale of my misfortunes, for the hand of heaven has been laid heavy upon me; but as regards your question, there is an island far away in the sea which is called ‘the Ogygian.’ Here dwells the cunning and powerful goddess Calypso, daughter of Atlas.
She lives by herself far from all neighbours human or divine.
Fortune, however, brought me to her hearth all desolate and alone, for Jove struck my ship with his thunderbolts, and broke it up in mid-ocean.
My brave comrades were drowned every man of them, but I stuck to the keel and was carried hither and thither for the space of nine days, till at last during the darkness of the tenth night the gods brought me to the Ogygian island where the great goddess Calypso lives.
She took me in and treated me with the utmost kindness; indeed she wanted to make me immortal that I might never grow old, but she could not persuade me to let her do so.
“I stayed with Calypso seven years straight on end, and watered the good clothes she gave me with my tears during the whole time; but at last when the eighth year came round she bade me depart of her own free will, either because Jove had told her she must, or because she had changed her mind.
She sent me from her island on a raft, which she provisioned with abundance of bread and wine.
Moreover she gave me good stout clothing, and sent me a wind that blew both warm and fair.
Days seven and ten did I sail over the sea, and on the eighteenth I caught sight of the first outlines of the mountains upon your coast—and glad indeed was I to set eyes upon them.
Nevertheless there was still much trouble in store for me, for at this point Neptune would let me go no further, and raised a great storm against me; the sea was so terribly high that I could no longer keep to my raft, which went to pieces under the fury of the gale, and I had to swim for it, till wind and current brought me to your shores.
“There I tried to land, but could not, for it was a bad place and the waves dashed me against the rocks, so I again took to the sea and swam on till I came to a river that seemed the most likely landing place, for there were no rocks and it was sheltered from the wind.
Here, then, I got out of the water and gathered my senses together again.
Night was coming on, so I left the river, and went into a thicket, where I covered myself all over with leaves, and presently heaven sent me off into a very deep sleep.
Sick and sorry as I was I slept among the leaves all night, and through the next day till afternoon, when I woke as the sun was westering, and saw your daughter’s maid servants playing upon the beach, and your daughter among them looking like a goddess.
I besought her aid, and she proved to be of an excellent disposition, much more so than could be expected from so young a person—for young people are apt to be thoughtless.
She gave me plenty of bread and wine, and when she had had me washed in the river she also gave me the clothes in which you see me.
Now, therefore, though it has pained me to do so, I have told you the whole truth.” Then Alcinous said, “Stranger, it was very wrong of my daughter not to bring you on at once to my house along with the maids, seeing that she was the first person whose aid you asked.” “Pray do not scold her,” replied Ulysses; “she is not to blame.
She did tell me to follow along with the maids, but I was ashamed and afraid, for I thought you might perhaps be displeased if you saw me.
Every human being is sometimes a little suspicious and irritable.” “Stranger,” replied Alcinous, “I am not the kind of man to get angry about nothing; it is always better to be reasonable; but by Father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, now that I see what kind of person you are, and how much you think as I do, I wish you would stay here, marry my daughter, and become my son-in-law.
If you will stay I will give you a house and an estate, but no one (heaven forbid) shall keep you here against your own wish, and that you may be sure of this I will attend tomorrow to the matter of your escort.
You can sleep64 during the whole voyage if you like, and the men shall sail you over smooth waters either to your own home, or wherever you please, even though it be a long way further off than Euboea, which those of my people who saw it when they took yellow-haired Rhadamanthus to see Tityus the son of Gaia, tell me is the furthest of any place—and yet they did the whole voyage in a single day without distressing themselves, and came back again afterwards.
You will thus see how much my ships excel all others, and what magnificent oarsmen my sailors are.” Then was Ulysses glad and prayed aloud saying, “Father Jove, grant that Alcinous may do all as he has said, for so he will win an imperishable name among mankind, and at the same time I shall return to my country.” Thus did they converse.
Then Arete told her maids to set a bed in the room that was in the gatehouse, and make it with good red rugs, and to spread coverlets on the top of them with woollen cloaks for Ulysses to wear.
The maids thereon went out with torches in their hands, and when they had made the bed they came up to Ulysses and said, “Rise, sir stranger, and come with us for your bed is ready,” and glad indeed was he to go to his rest.
So Ulysses slept in a bed placed in a room over the echoing gateway; but Alcinous lay in the inner part of the house, with the queen his wife by his side.
BOOK VIII BANQUET IN THE HOUSE OF ALCINOUS—THE GAMES.
Now when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, Alcinous and Ulysses both rose, and Alcinous led the way to the Phaeacian place of assembly, which was near the ships.
When they got there they sat down side by side on a seat of polished stone, while Minerva took the form of one of Alcinous’ servants, and went round the town in order to help Ulysses to get home.
She went up to the citizens, man by man, and said, “Aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians, come to the assembly all of you and listen to the stranger who has just come off a long voyage to the house of King Alcinous; he looks like an immortal god.” With these words she made them all want to come, and they flocked to the assembly till seats and standing room were alike crowded.
Every one was struck with the appearance of Ulysses, for Minerva had beautified him about the head and shoulders, making him look taller and stouter than he really was, that he might impress the Phaeacians favourably as being a very remarkable man, and might come off well in the many trials of skill to which they would challenge him.
Then, when they were got together, Alcinous spoke: “Hear me,” said he, “aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians, that I may speak even as I am minded.
This stranger, whoever he may be, has found his way to my house from somewhere or other either East or West.
He wants an escort and wishes to have the matter settled.
Let us then get one ready for him, as we have done for others before him; indeed, no one who ever yet came to my house has been able to complain of me for not speeding on his way soon enough.
Let us draw a ship into the sea—one that has never yet made a voyage—and man her with two and fifty of our smartest young sailors.
Then when you have made fast your oars each by his own seat, leave the ship and come to my house to prepare a feast.65 I will find you in everything.
I am giving these instructions to the young men who will form the crew, for as regards you aldermen and town councillors, you will join me in entertaining our guest in the cloisters.
I can take no excuses, and we will have Demodocus to sing to us; for there is no bard like him whatever he may choose to sing about.” Alcinous then led the way, and the others followed after, while a servant went to fetch Demodocus.
The fifty-two picked oarsmen went to the sea shore as they had been told, and when they got there they drew the ship into the water, got her mast and sails inside her, bound the oars to the thole-pins with twisted thongs of leather, all in due course, and spread the white sails aloft.
They moored the vessel a little way out from land, and then came on shore and went to the house of King Alcinous.
The out houses,66 yards, and all the precincts were filled with crowds of men in great multitudes both old and young; and Alcinous killed them a dozen sheep, eight full grown pigs, and two oxen.
These they skinned and dressed so as to provide a magnificent banquet.
A servant presently led in the famous bard Demodocus, whom the muse had dearly loved, but to whom she had given both good and evil, for though she had endowed him with a divine gift of song, she had robbed him of his eyesight.
Pontonous set a seat for him among the guests, leaning it up against a bearing-post.
He hung the lyre for him on a peg over his head, and showed him where he was to feel for it with his hands.
He also set a fair table with a basket of victuals by his side, and a cup of wine from which he might drink whenever he was so disposed.
The company then laid their hands upon the good things that were before them, but as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, the muse inspired Demodocus to sing the feats of heroes, and more especially a matter that was then in the mouths of all men, to wit, the quarrel between Ulysses and Achilles, and the fierce words that they heaped on one another as they sat together at a banquet.
But Agamemnon was glad when he heard his chieftains quarrelling with one another, for Apollo had foretold him this at Pytho when he crossed the stone floor to consult the oracle.
Here was the beginning of the evil that by the will of Jove fell both upon Danaans and Trojans.
Thus sang the bard, but Ulysses drew his purple mantle over his head and covered his face, for he was ashamed to let the Phaeacians see that he was weeping.
When the bard left off singing he wiped the tears from his eyes, uncovered his face, and, taking his cup, made a drink-offering to the gods; but when the Phaeacians pressed Demodocus to sing further, for they delighted in his lays, then Ulysses again drew his mantle over his head and wept bitterly.
No one noticed his distress except Alcinous, who was sitting near him, and heard the heavy sighs that he was heaving.
So he at once said, “Aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians, we have had enough now, both of the feast, and of the minstrelsy that is its due accompaniment; let us proceed therefore to the athletic sports, so that our guest on his return home may be able to tell his friends how much we surpass all other nations as boxers, wrestlers, jumpers, and runners.” With these words he led the way, and the others followed after.
A servant hung Demodocus’s lyre on its peg for him, led him out of the cloister, and set him on the same way as that along which all the chief men of the Phaeacians were going to see the sports; a crowd of several thousands of people followed them, and there were many excellent competitors for all the prizes.
Acroneos, Ocyalus, Elatreus, Nauteus, Prymneus, Anchialus, Eretmeus, Ponteus, Proreus, Thoon, Anabesineus, and Amphialus son of Polyneus son of Tecton.
There was also Euryalus son of Naubolus, who was like Mars himself, and was the best looking man among the Phaeacians except Laodamas.
Three sons of Alcinous, Laodamas, Halios, and Clytoneus, competed also.
The foot races came first.
The course was set out for them from the starting post, and they raised a dust upon the plain as they all flew forward at the same moment.
Clytoneus came in first by a long way; he left every one else behind him by the length of the furrow that a couple of mules can plough in a fallow field.67 They then turned to the painful art of wrestling, and here Euryalus proved to be the best man.
Amphialus excelled all the others in jumping, while at throwing the disc there was no one who could approach Elatreus.
Alcinous’s son Laodamas was the best boxer, and he it was who presently said, when they had all been diverted with the games, “Let us ask the stranger whether he excels in any of these sports; he seems very powerfully built; his thighs, calves, hands, and neck are of prodigious strength, nor is he at all old, but he has suffered much lately, and there is nothing like the sea for making havoc with a man, no matter how strong he is.” “You are quite right, Laodamas,” replied Euryalus, “go up to your guest and speak to him about it yourself.” When Laodamas heard this he made his way into the middle of the crowd and said to Ulysses, “I hope, Sir, that you will enter yourself for some one or other of our competitions if you are skilled in any of them—and you must have gone in for many a one before now.
There is nothing that does any one so much credit all his life long as the showing himself a proper man with his hands and feet.
Have a try therefore at something, and banish all sorrow from your mind.
Your return home will not be long delayed, for the ship is already drawn into the water, and the crew is found.” Ulysses answered, “Laodamas, why do you taunt me in this way?
my mind is set rather on cares than contests; I have been through infinite trouble, and am come among you now as a suppliant, praying your king and people to further me on my return home.” Then Euryalus reviled him outright and said, “I gather, then, that you are unskilled in any of the many sports that men generally delight in.
I suppose you are one of those grasping traders that go about in ships as captains or merchants, and who think of nothing but of their outward freights and homeward cargoes.
There does not seem to be much of the athlete about you.” “For shame, Sir,” answered Ulysses, fiercely, “you are an insolent fellow—so true is it that the gods do not grace all men alike in speech, person, and understanding.
One man may be of weak presence, but heaven has adorned this with such a good conversation that he charms every one who sees him; his honeyed moderation carries his hearers with him so that he is leader in all assemblies of his fellows, and wherever he goes he is looked up to.
Another may be as handsome as a god, but his good looks are not crowned with discretion.
This is your case.
No god could make a finer looking fellow than you are, but you are a fool.
Your ill-judged remarks have made me exceedingly angry, and you are quite mistaken, for I excel in a great many athletic exercises; indeed, so long as I had youth and strength, I was among the first athletes of the age.
Now, however, I am worn out by labour and sorrow, for I have gone through much both on the field of battle and by the waves of the weary sea; still, in spite of all this I will compete, for your taunts have stung me to the quick.” So he hurried up without even taking his cloak off, and seized a disc, larger, more massive and much heavier than those used by the Phaeacians when disc-throwing among themselves.68 Then, swinging it back, he threw it from his brawny hand, and it made a humming sound in the air as he did so.
The Phaeacians quailed beneath the rushing of its flight as it sped gracefully from his hand, and flew beyond any mark that had been made yet.
Minerva, in the form of a man, came and marked the place where it had fallen.
“A blind man, Sir,” said she, “could easily tell your mark by groping for it—it is so far ahead of any other.
You may make your mind easy about this contest, for no Phaeacian can come near to such a throw as yours.” Ulysses was glad when he found he had a friend among the lookers-on, so he began to speak more pleasantly.
“Young men,” said he, “come up to that throw if you can, and I will throw another disc as heavy or even heavier.
If anyone wants to have a bout with me let him come on, for I am exceedingly angry; I will box, wrestle, or run, I do not care what it is, with any man of you all except Laodamas, but not with him because I am his guest, and one cannot compete with one’s own personal friend.
At least I do not think it a prudent or a sensible thing for a guest to challenge his host’s family at any game, especially when he is in a foreign country.
He will cut the ground from under his own feet if he does; but I make no exception as regards any one else, for I want to have the matter out and know which is the best man.
I am a good hand at every kind of athletic sport known among mankind.
I am an excellent archer.
In battle I am always the first to bring a man down with my arrow, no matter how many more are taking aim at him alongside of me.
Philoctetes was the only man who could shoot better than I could when we Achaeans were before Troy and in practice.
I far excel every one else in the whole world, of those who still eat bread upon the face of the earth, but I should not like to shoot against the mighty dead, such as Hercules, or Eurytus the Oechalian—men who could shoot against the gods themselves.
This in fact was how Eurytus came prematurely by his end, for Apollo was angry with him and killed him because he challenged him as an archer.
I can throw a dart farther than any one else can shoot an arrow.
Running is the only point in respect of which I am afraid some of the Phaeacians might beat me, for I have been brought down very low at sea; my provisions ran short, and therefore I am still weak.” They all held their peace except King Alcinous, who began, “Sir, we have had much pleasure in hearing all that you have told us, from which I understand that you are willing to show your prowess, as having been displeased with some insolent remarks that have been made to you by one of our athletes, and which could never have been uttered by any one who knows how to talk with propriety.
I hope you will apprehend my meaning, and will explain to any one of your chief men who may be dining with yourself and your family when you get home, that we have an hereditary aptitude for accomplishments of all kinds.
We are not particularly remarkable for our boxing, nor yet as wrestlers, but we are singularly fleet of foot and are excellent sailors.
We are extremely fond of good dinners, music, and dancing; we also like frequent changes of linen, warm baths, and good beds, so now, please, some of you who are the best dancers set about dancing, that our guest on his return home may be able to tell his friends how much we surpass all other nations as sailors, runners, dancers, and minstrels.
Demodocus has left his lyre at my house, so run some one or other of you and fetch it for him.” On this a servant hurried off to bring the lyre from the king’s house, and the nine men who had been chosen as stewards stood forward.
It was their business to manage everything connected with the sports, so they made the ground smooth and marked a wide space for the dancers.
Presently the servant came back with Demodocus’s lyre, and he took his place in the midst of them, whereon the best young dancers in the town began to foot and trip it so nimbly that Ulysses was delighted with the merry twinkling of their feet.
Meanwhile the bard began to sing the loves of Mars and Venus, and how they first began their intrigue in the house of Vulcan.
Mars made Venus many presents, and defiled King Vulcan’s marriage bed, so the sun, who saw what they were about, told Vulcan.
Vulcan was very angry when he heard such dreadful news, so he went to his smithy brooding mischief, got his great anvil into its place, and began to forge some chains which none could either unloose or break, so that they might stay there in that place.69 When he had finished his snare he went into his bedroom and festooned the bed-posts all over with chains like cobwebs; he also let many hang down from the great beam of the ceiling.
Not even a god could see them so fine and subtle were they.
As soon as he had spread the chains all over the bed, he made as though he were setting out for the fair state of Lemnos, which of all places in the world was the one he was most fond of.
But Mars kept no blind look out, and as soon as he saw him start, hurried off to his house, burning with love for Venus.
Now Venus was just come in from a visit to her father Jove, and was about sitting down when Mars came inside the house, and said as he took her hand in his own, “Let us go to the couch of Vulcan: he is not at home, but is gone off to Lemnos among the Sintians, whose speech is barbarous.” She was nothing loth, so they went to the couch to take their rest, whereon they were caught in the toils which cunning Vulcan had spread for them, and could neither get up nor stir hand or foot, but found too late that they were in a trap.
Then Vulcan came up to them, for he had turned back before reaching Lemnos, when his scout the sun told him what was going on.
He was in a furious passion, and stood in the vestibule making a dreadful noise as he shouted to all the gods.
“Father Jove,” he cried, “and all you other blessed gods who live for ever, come here and see the ridiculous and disgraceful sight that I will show you.
Jove’s daughter Venus is always dishonouring me because I am lame.
She is in love with Mars, who is handsome and clean built, whereas I am a cripple—but my parents are to blame for that, not I; they ought never to have begotten me.
Come and see the pair together asleep on my bed.
It makes me furious to look at them.
They are very fond of one another, but I do not think they will lie there longer than they can help, nor do I think that they will sleep much; there, however, they shall stay till her father has repaid me the sum I gave him for his baggage of a daughter, who is fair but not honest.” On this the gods gathered to the house of Vulcan.
Earth-encircling Neptune came, and Mercury the bringer of luck, and King Apollo, but the goddesses staid at home all of them for shame.
Then the givers of all good things stood in the doorway, and the blessed gods roared with inextinguishable laughter, as they saw how cunning Vulcan had been, whereon one would turn towards his neighbour saying: “Ill deeds do not prosper, and the weak confound the strong.
See how limping Vulcan, lame as he is, has caught Mars who is the fleetest god in heaven; and now Mars will be cast in heavy damages.” Thus did they converse, but King Apollo said to Mercury, “Messenger Mercury, giver of good things, you would not care how strong the chains were, would you, if you could sleep with Venus?” “King Apollo,” answered Mercury, “I only wish I might get the chance, though there were three times as many chains—and you might look on, all of you, gods and goddesses, but I would sleep with her if I could.” The immortal gods burst out laughing as they heard him, but Neptune took it all seriously, and kept on imploring Vulcan to set Mars free again.
“Let him go,” he cried, “and I will undertake, as you require, that he shall pay you all the damages that are held reasonable among the immortal gods.” “Do not,” replied Vulcan, “ask me to do this; a bad man’s bond is bad security; what remedy could I enforce against you if Mars should go away and leave his debts behind him along with his chains?” “Vulcan,” said Neptune, “if Mars goes away without paying his damages, I will pay you myself.” So Vulcan answered, “In this case I cannot and must not refuse you.” Thereon he loosed the bonds that bound them, and as soon as they were free they scampered off, Mars to Thrace and laughter-loving Venus to Cyprus and to Paphos, where is her grove and her altar fragrant with burnt offerings.
Here the Graces bathed her, and anointed her with oil of ambrosia such as the immortal gods make use of, and they clothed her in raiment of the most enchanting beauty.
Thus sang the bard, and both Ulysses and the seafaring Phaeacians were charmed as they heard him.
Then Alcinous told Laodamas and Halius to dance alone, for there was no one to compete with them.
So they took a red ball which Polybus had made for them, and one of them bent himself backwards and threw it up towards the clouds, while the other jumped from off the ground and caught it with ease before it came down again.
When they had done throwing the ball straight up into the air they began to dance, and at the same time kept on throwing it backwards and forwards to one another, while all the young men in the ring applauded and made a great stamping with their feet.
Then Ulysses said: “King Alcinous, you said your people were the nimblest dancers in the world, and indeed they have proved themselves to be so.
I was astonished as I saw them.” The king was delighted at this, and exclaimed to the Phaeacians, “Aldermen and town councillors, our guest seems to be a person of singular judgement; let us give him such proof of our hospitality as he may reasonably expect.
There are twelve chief men among you, and counting myself there are thirteen; contribute, each of you, a clean cloak, a shirt, and a talent of fine gold; let us give him all this in a lump down at once, so that when he gets his supper he may do so with a light heart.
As for Euryalus he will have to make a formal apology and a present too, for he has been rude.” Thus did he speak.
The others all of them applauded his saying, and sent their servants to fetch the presents.
Then Euryalus said, “King Alcinous, I will give the stranger all the satisfaction you require.
He shall have my sword, which is of bronze, all but the hilt, which is of silver.
I will also give him the scabbard of newly sawn ivory into which it fits.
It will be worth a great deal to him.” As he spoke he placed the sword in the hands of Ulysses and said, “Good luck to you, father stranger; if anything has been said amiss may the winds blow it away with them, and may heaven grant you a safe return, for I understand you have been long away from home, and have gone through much hardship.” To which Ulysses answered, “Good luck to you too my friend, and may the gods grant you every happiness.
I hope you will not miss the sword you have given me along with your apology.” With these words he girded the sword about his shoulders and towards sundown the presents began to make their appearance, as the servants of the donors kept bringing them to the house of King Alcinous; here his sons received them, and placed them under their mother’s charge.
Then Alcinous led the way to the house and bade his guests take their seats.
“Wife,” said he, turning to Queen Arete, “Go, fetch the best chest we have, and put a clean cloak and shirt in it.
Also, set a copper on the fire and heat some water; our guest will take a warm bath; see also to the careful packing of the presents that the noble Phaeacians have made him; he will thus better enjoy both his supper and the singing that will follow.
I shall myself give him this golden goblet—which is of exquisite workmanship—that he may be reminded of me for the rest of his life whenever he makes a drink offering to Jove, or to any of the gods.”70 Then Arete told her maids to set a large tripod upon the fire as fast as they could, whereon they set a tripod full of bath water on to a clear fire; they threw on sticks to make it blaze, and the water became hot as the flame played about the belly of the tripod.71 Meanwhile Arete brought a magnificent chest from her own room, and inside it she packed all the beautiful presents of gold and raiment which the Phaeacians had brought.
Lastly she added a cloak and a good shirt from Alcinous, and said to Ulysses: “See to the lid yourself, and have the whole bound round at once, for fear any one should rob you by the way when you are asleep in your ship.” 72 When Ulysses heard this he put the lid on the chest and made it fast with a bond that Circe had taught him.
He had done so before an upper servant told him to come to the bath and wash himself.
He was very glad of a warm bath, for he had had no one to wait upon him ever since he left the house of Calypso, who as long as he remained with her had taken as good care of him as though he had been a god.
When the servants had done washing and anointing him with oil, and had given him a clean cloak and shirt, he left the bath room and joined the guests who were sitting over their wine.
Lovely Nausicaa stood by one of the bearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloister, and admired him as she saw him pass.
“Farewell stranger,” said she, “do not forget me when you are safe at home again, for it is to me first that you owe a ransom for having saved your life.” And Ulysses said, “Nausicaa, daughter of great Alcinous, may Jove the mighty husband of Juno, grant that I may reach my home; so shall I bless you as my guardian angel all my days, for it was you who saved me.” When he had said this, he seated himself beside Alcinous.
Supper was then served, and the wine was mixed for drinking.
A servant led in the favourite bard Demodocus, and set him in the midst of the company, near one of the bearing-posts supporting the cloister, that he might lean against it.
Then Ulysses cut off a piece of roast pork with plenty of fat (for there was abundance left on the joint) and said to a servant, “Take this piece of pork over to Demodocus and tell him to eat it; for all the pain his lays may cause me I will salute him none the less; bards are honoured and respected throughout the world, for the muse teaches them their songs and loves them.” The servant carried the pork in his fingers over to Demodocus, who took it and was very much pleased.
They then laid their hands on the good things that were before them, and as soon as they had had to eat and drink, Ulysses said to Demodocus, “Demodocus, there is no one in the world whom I admire more than I do you.
You must have studied under the Muse, Jove’s daughter, and under Apollo, so accurately do you sing the return of the Achaeans with all their sufferings and adventures.
If you were not there yourself, you must have heard it all from some one who was.
Now, however, change your song and tell us of the wooden horse which Epeus made with the assistance of Minerva, and which Ulysses got by stratagem into the fort of Troy after freighting it with the men who afterwards sacked the city.
If you will sing this tale aright I will tell all the world how magnificently heaven has endowed you.” The bard inspired of heaven took up the story at the point where some of the Argives set fire to their tents and sailed away while others, hidden within the horse,73 were waiting with Ulysses in the Trojan place of assembly.
For the Trojans themselves had drawn the horse into their fortress, and it stood there while they sat in council round it, and were in three minds as to what they should do.
Some were for breaking it up then and there; others would have it dragged to the top of the rock on which the fortress stood, and then thrown down the precipice; while yet others were for letting it remain as an offering and propitiation for the gods.
And this was how they settled it in the end, for the city was doomed when it took in that horse, within which were all the bravest of the Argives waiting to bring death and destruction on the Trojans.
Anon he sang how the sons of the Achaeans issued from the horse, and sacked the town, breaking out from their ambuscade.
He sang how they overran the city hither and thither and ravaged it, and how Ulysses went raging like Mars along with Menelaus to the house of Deiphobus.
It was there that the fight raged most furiously, nevertheless by Minerva’s help he was victorious.
All this he told, but Ulysses was overcome as he heard him, and his cheeks were wet with tears.
He wept as a woman weeps when she throws herself on the body of her husband who has fallen before his own city and people, fighting bravely in defence of his home and children.
She screams aloud and flings her arms about him as he lies gasping for breath and dying, but her enemies beat her from behind about the back and shoulders, and carry her off into slavery, to a life of labour and sorrow, and the beauty fades from her cheeks—even so piteously did Ulysses weep, but none of those present perceived his tears except Alcinous, who was sitting near him, and could hear the sobs and sighs that he was heaving.
The king, therefore, at once rose and said: “Aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians, let Demodocus cease his song, for there are those present who do not seem to like it.
From the moment that we had done supper and Demodocus began to sing, our guest has been all the time groaning and lamenting.
He is evidently in great trouble, so let the bard leave off, that we may all enjoy ourselves, hosts and guest alike.
This will be much more as it should be, for all these festivities, with the escort and the presents that we are making with so much good will are wholly in his honour, and any one with even a moderate amount of right feeling knows that he ought to treat a guest and a suppliant as though he were his own brother.
“Therefore, Sir, do you on your part affect no more concealment nor reserve in the matter about which I shall ask you; it will be more polite in you to give me a plain answer; tell me the name by which your father and mother over yonder used to call you, and by which you were known among your neighbours and fellow-citizens.
There is no one, neither rich nor poor, who is absolutely without any name whatever, for people’s fathers and mothers give them names as soon as they are born.
Tell me also your country, nation, and city, that our ships may shape their purpose accordingly and take you there.
For the Phaeacians have no pilots; their vessels have no rudders as those of other nations have, but the ships themselves understand what it is that we are thinking about and want; they know all the cities and countries in the whole world, and can traverse the sea just as well even when it is covered with mist and cloud, so that there is no danger of being wrecked or coming to any harm.
Still I do remember hearing my father say that Neptune was angry with us for being too easy-going in the matter of giving people escorts.
He said that one of these days he should wreck a ship of ours as it was returning from having escorted some one,74 and bury our city under a high mountain.
This is what my father used to say, but whether the god will carry out his threat or no is a matter which he will decide for himself.
“And now, tell me and tell me true.
Where have you been wandering, and in what countries have you travelled?
Tell us of the peoples themselves, and of their cities—who were hostile, savage and uncivilised, and who, on the other hand, hospitable and humane.
Tell us also why you are made so unhappy on hearing about the return of the Argive Danaans from Troy.
The gods arranged all this, and sent them their misfortunes in order that future generations might have something to sing about.
Did you lose some brave kinsman of your wife’s when you were before Troy?
a son-in-law or father-in-law—which are the nearest relations a man has outside his own flesh and blood?
or was it some brave and kindly-natured comrade—for a good friend is as dear to a man as his own brother?” BOOK IX ULYSSES DECLARES HIMSELF AND BEGINS HIS STORY—-THE CICONS, LOTOPHAGI, AND CYCLOPES.
And Ulysses answered, “King Alcinous, it is a good thing to hear a bard with such a divine voice as this man has.
There is nothing better or more delightful than when a whole people make merry together, with the guests sitting orderly to listen, while the table is loaded with bread and meats, and the cup-bearer draws wine and fills his cup for every man.
This is indeed as fair a sight as a man can see.
Now, however, since you are inclined to ask the story of my sorrows, and rekindle my own sad memories in respect of them, I do not know how to begin, nor yet how to continue and conclude my tale, for the hand of heaven has been laid heavily upon me.
“Firstly, then, I will tell you my name that you too may know it, and one day, if I outlive this time of sorrow, may become my guests though I live so far away from all of you.
I am Ulysses son of Laertes, renowned among mankind for all manner of subtlety, so that my fame ascends to heaven.
I live in Ithaca, where there is a high mountain called Neritum, covered with forests; and not far from it there is a group of islands very near to one another—Dulichium, Same, and the wooded island of Zacynthus.
It lies squat on the horizon, all highest up in the sea towards the sunset, while the others lie away from it towards dawn.75 It is a rugged island, but it breeds brave men, and my eyes know none that they better love to look upon.
The goddess Calypso kept me with her in her cave, and wanted me to marry her, as did also the cunning Aeaean goddess Circe; but they could neither of them persuade me, for there is nothing dearer to a man than his own country and his parents, and however splendid a home he may have in a foreign country, if it be far from father or mother, he does not care about it.
Now, however, I will tell you of the many hazardous adventures which by Jove’s will I met with on my return from Troy.
“When I had set sail thence the wind took me first to Ismarus, which is the city of the Cicons.
There I sacked the town and put the people to the sword.
We took their wives and also much booty, which we divided equitably amongst us, so that none might have reason to complain.
I then said that we had better make off at once, but my men very foolishly would not obey me, so they staid there drinking much wine and killing great numbers of sheep and oxen on the sea shore.
Meanwhile the Cicons cried out for help to other Cicons who lived inland.
These were more in number, and stronger, and they were more skilled in the art of war, for they could fight, either from chariots or on foot as the occasion served; in the morning, therefore, they came as thick as leaves and bloom in summer, and the hand of heaven was against us, so that we were hard pressed.
They set the battle in array near the ships, and the hosts aimed their bronze-shod spears at one another.76 So long as the day waxed and it was still morning, we held our own against them, though they were more in number than we; but as the sun went down, towards the time when men loose their oxen, the Cicons got the better of us, and we lost half a dozen men from every ship we had; so we got away with those that were left.
“Thence we sailed onward with sorrow in our hearts, but glad to have escaped death though we had lost our comrades, nor did we leave till we had thrice invoked each one of the poor fellows who had perished by the hands of the Cicons.
Then Jove raised the North wind against us till it blew a hurricane, so that land and sky were hidden in thick clouds, and night sprang forth out of the heavens.
We let the ships run before the gale, but the force of the wind tore our sails to tatters, so we took them down for fear of shipwreck, and rowed our hardest towards the land.
There we lay two days and two nights suffering much alike from toil and distress of mind, but on the morning of the third day we again raised our masts, set sail, and took our places, letting the wind and steersmen direct our ship.
I should have got home at that time unharmed had not the North wind and the currents been against me as I was doubling Cape Malea, and set me off my course hard by the island of Cythera.
“I was driven thence by foul winds for a space of nine days upon the sea, but on the tenth day we reached the land of the Lotus-eaters, who live on a food that comes from a kind of flower.
Here we landed to take in fresh water, and our crews got their mid-day meal on the shore near the ships.
When they had eaten and drunk I sent two of my company to see what manner of men the people of the place might be, and they had a third man under them.
They started at once, and went about among the Lotus-eaters, who did them no hurt, but gave them to eat of the lotus, which was so delicious that those who ate of it left off caring about home, and did not even want to go back and say what had happened to them, but were for staying and munching lotus77 with the Lotus-eaters without thinking further of their return; nevertheless, though they wept bitterly I forced them back to the ships and made them fast under the benches.
Then I told the rest to go on board at once, lest any of them should taste of the lotus and leave off wanting to get home, so they took their places and smote the grey sea with their oars.
“We sailed hence, always in much distress, till we came to the land of the lawless and inhuman Cyclopes.
Now the Cyclopes neither plant nor plough, but trust in providence, and live on such wheat, barley, and grapes as grow wild without any kind of tillage, and their wild grapes yield them wine as the sun and the rain may grow them.
They have no laws nor assemblies of the people, but live in caves on the tops of high mountains; each is lord and master in his family, and they take no account of their neighbours.
“Now off their harbour there lies a wooded and fertile island not quite close to the land of the Cyclopes, but still not far.
It is over-run with wild goats, that breed there in great numbers and are never disturbed by foot of man; for sportsmen—who as a rule will suffer so much hardship in forest or among mountain precipices—do not go there, nor yet again is it ever ploughed or fed down, but it lies a wilderness untilled and unsown from year to year, and has no living thing upon it but only goats.
For the Cyclopes have no ships, nor yet shipwrights who could make ships for them; they cannot therefore go from city to city, or sail over the sea to one another’s country as people who have ships can do; if they had had these they would have colonised the island,78 for it is a very good one, and would yield everything in due season.
There are meadows that in some places come right down to the sea shore, well watered and full of luscious grass; grapes would do there excellently; there is level land for ploughing, and it would always yield heavily at harvest time, for the soil is deep.
There is a good harbour where no cables are wanted, nor yet anchors, nor need a ship be moored, but all one has to do is to beach one’s vessel and stay there till the wind becomes fair for putting out to sea again.
At the head of the harbour there is a spring of clear water coming out of a cave, and there are poplars growing all round it.
“Here we entered, but so dark was the night that some god must have brought us in, for there was nothing whatever to be seen.
A thick mist hung all round our ships;79 the moon was hidden behind a mass of clouds so that no one could have seen the island if he had looked for it, nor were there any breakers to tell us we were close in shore before we found ourselves upon the land itself; when, however, we had beached the ships, we took down the sails, went ashore and camped upon the beach till daybreak.
“When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, we admired the island and wandered all over it, while the nymphs Jove’s daughters roused the wild goats that we might get some meat for our dinner.
On this we fetched our spears and bows and arrows from the ships, and dividing ourselves into three bands began to shoot the goats.
Heaven sent us excellent sport; I had twelve ships with me, and each ship got nine goats, while my own ship had ten; thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun we ate and drank our fill, and we had plenty of wine left, for each one of us had taken many jars full when we sacked the city of the Cicons, and this had not yet run out.
While we were feasting we kept turning our eyes towards the land of the Cyclopes, which was hard by, and saw the smoke of their stubble fires.
We could almost fancy we heard their voices and the bleating of their sheep and goats, but when the sun went down and it came on dark, we camped down upon the beach, and next morning I called a council.
“‘Stay here, my brave fellows,’ said I, ‘all the rest of you, while I go with my ship and exploit these people myself: I want to see if they are uncivilised savages, or a hospitable and humane race.’ “I went on board, bidding my men to do so also and loose the hawsers; so they took their places and smote the grey sea with their oars.
When we got to the land, which was not far, there, on the face of a cliff near the sea, we saw a great cave overhung with laurels.
It was a station for a great many sheep and goats, and outside there was a large yard, with a high wall round it made of stones built into the ground and of trees both pine and oak.
This was the abode of a huge monster who was then away from home shepherding his flocks.
He would have nothing to do with other people, but led the life of an outlaw.
He was a horrid creature, not like a human being at all, but resembling rather some crag that stands out boldly against the sky on the top of a high mountain.
“I told my men to draw the ship ashore, and stay where they were, all but the twelve best among them, who were to go along with myself.
I also took a goatskin of sweet black wine which had been given me by Maron, son of Euanthes, who was priest of Apollo the patron god of Ismarus, and lived within the wooded precincts of the temple.
When we were sacking the city we respected him, and spared his life, as also his wife and child; so he made me some presents of great value—seven talents of fine gold, and a bowl of silver, with twelve jars of sweet wine, unblended, and of the most exquisite flavour.
Not a man nor maid in the house knew about it, but only himself, his wife, and one housekeeper: when he drank it he mixed twenty parts of water to one of wine, and yet the fragrance from the mixing-bowl was so exquisite that it was impossible to refrain from drinking.
I filled a large skin with this wine, and took a wallet full of provisions with me, for my mind misgave me that I might have to deal with some savage who would be of great strength, and would respect neither right nor law.
“We soon reached his cave, but he was out shepherding, so we went inside and took stock of all that we could see.
His cheese-racks were loaded with cheeses, and he had more lambs and kids than his pens could hold.
They were kept in separate flocks; first there were the hoggets, then the oldest of the younger lambs and lastly the very young ones80 all kept apart from one another; as for his dairy, all the vessels, bowls, and milk pails into which he milked, were swimming with whey.
When they saw all this, my men begged me to let them first steal some cheeses, and make off with them to the ship; they would then return, drive down the lambs and kids, put them on board and sail away with them.
It would have been indeed better if we had done so but I would not listen to them, for I wanted to see the owner himself, in the hope that he might give me a present.
When, however, we saw him my poor men found him ill to deal with.
“We lit a fire, offered some of the cheeses in sacrifice, ate others of them, and then sat waiting till the Cyclops should come in with his sheep.
When he came, he brought in with him a huge load of dry firewood to light the fire for his supper, and this he flung with such a noise on to the floor of his cave that we hid ourselves for fear at the far end of the cavern.
Meanwhile he drove all the ewes inside, as well as the she-goats that he was going to milk, leaving the males, both rams and he-goats, outside in the yards.
Then he rolled a huge stone to the mouth of the cave—so huge that two and twenty strong four-wheeled waggons would not be enough to draw it from its place against the doorway.
When he had so done he sat down and milked his ewes and goats, all in due course, and then let each of them have her own young.
He curdled half the milk and set it aside in wicker strainers, but the other half he poured into bowls that he might drink it for his supper.
When he had got through with all his work, he lit the fire, and then caught sight of us, whereon he said: “‘Strangers, who are you?
Where do sail from?
Are you traders, or do you sail the sea as rovers, with your hands against every man, and every man’s hand against you?’ “We were frightened out of our senses by his loud voice and monstrous form, but I managed to say, ‘We are Achaeans on our way home from Troy, but by the will of Jove, and stress of weather, we have been driven far out of our course.
We are the people of Agamemnon, son of Atreus, who has won infinite renown throughout the whole world, by sacking so great a city and killing so many people.
We therefore humbly pray you to show us some hospitality, and otherwise make us such presents as visitors may reasonably expect.
May your excellency fear the wrath of heaven, for we are your suppliants, and Jove takes all respectable travellers under his protection, for he is the avenger of all suppliants and foreigners in distress.’ “To this he gave me but a pitiless answer, ‘Stranger,’ said he, ‘you are a fool, or else you know nothing of this country.
Talk to me, indeed, about fearing the gods or shunning their anger?
We Cyclopes do not care about Jove or any of your blessed gods, for we are ever so much stronger than they.
I shall not spare either yourself or your companions out of any regard for Jove, unless I am in the humour for doing so.
And now tell me where you made your ship fast when you came on shore.
Was it round the point, or is she lying straight off the land?’ “He said this to draw me out, but I was too cunning to be caught in that way, so I answered with a lie; ‘Neptune,’ said I, ‘sent my ship on to the rocks at the far end of your country, and wrecked it.
We were driven on to them from the open sea, but I and those who are with me escaped the jaws of death.’ “The cruel wretch vouchsafed me not one word of answer, but with a sudden clutch he gripped up two of my men at once and dashed them down upon the ground as though they had been puppies.
Their brains were shed upon the ground, and the earth was wet with their blood.
Then he tore them limb from limb and supped upon them.
He gobbled them up like a lion in the wilderness, flesh, bones, marrow, and entrails, without leaving anything uneaten.
As for us, we wept and lifted up our hands to heaven on seeing such a horrid sight, for we did not know what else to do; but when the Cyclops had filled his huge paunch, and had washed down his meal of human flesh with a drink of neat milk, he stretched himself full length upon the ground among his sheep, and went to sleep.
I was at first inclined to seize my sword, draw it, and drive it into his vitals, but I reflected that if I did we should all certainly be lost, for we should never be able to shift the stone which the monster had put in front of the door.
So we stayed sobbing and sighing where we were till morning came.
“When the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn, appeared, he again lit his fire, milked his goats and ewes, all quite rightly, and then let each have her own young one; as soon as he had got through with all his work, he clutched up two more of my men, and began eating them for his morning’s meal.
Presently, with the utmost ease, he rolled the stone away from the door and drove out his sheep, but he at once put it back again—as easily as though he were merely clapping the lid on to a quiver full of arrows.
As soon as he had done so he shouted, and cried ‘Shoo, shoo,’ after his sheep to drive them on to the mountain; so I was left to scheme some way of taking my revenge and covering myself with glory.
“In the end I deemed it would be the best plan to do as follows: The Cyclops had a great club which was lying near one of the sheep pens; it was of green olive wood, and he had cut it intending to use it for a staff as soon as it should be dry.
It was so huge that we could only compare it to the mast of a twenty-oared merchant vessel of large burden, and able to venture out into open sea.
I went up to this club and cut off about six feet of it; I then gave this piece to the men and told them to fine it evenly off at one end, which they proceeded to do, and lastly I brought it to a point myself, charring the end in the fire to make it harder.
When I had done this I hid it under dung, which was lying about all over the cave, and told the men to cast lots which of them should venture along with myself to lift it and bore it into the monster’s eye while he was asleep.
The lot fell upon the very four whom I should have chosen, and I myself made five.
In the evening the wretch came back from shepherding, and drove his flocks into the cave—this time driving them all inside, and not leaving any in the yards; I suppose some fancy must have taken him, or a god must have prompted him to do so.
As soon as he had put the stone back to its place against the door, he sat down, milked his ewes and his goats all quite rightly, and then let each have her own young one; when he had got through with all this work, he gripped up two more of my men, and made his supper off them.
So I went up to him with an ivy-wood bowl of black wine in my hands: “‘Look here, Cyclops,’ said I, you have been eating a great deal of man’s flesh, so take this and drink some wine, that you may see what kind of liquor we had on board my ship.
I was bringing it to you as a drink-offering, in the hope that you would take compassion upon me and further me on my way home, whereas all you do is to go on ramping and raving most intolerably.
You ought to be ashamed of yourself; how can you expect people to come see you any more if you treat them in this way?’ “He then took the cup and drank.
He was so delighted with the taste of the wine that he begged me for another bowl full.
‘Be so kind,’ he said, ‘as to give me some more, and tell me your name at once.
I want to make you a present that you will be glad to have.
We have wine even in this country, for our soil grows grapes and the sun ripens them, but this drinks like Nectar and Ambrosia all in one.’ “I then gave him some more; three times did I fill the bowl for him, and three times did he drain it without thought or heed; then, when I saw that the wine had got into his head, I said to him as plausibly as I could: ‘Cyclops, you ask my name and I will tell it you; give me, therefore, the present you promised me; my name is Noman; this is what my father and mother and my friends have always called me.’ “But the cruel wretch said, ‘Then I will eat all Noman’s comrades before Noman himself, and will keep Noman for the last.
This is the present that I will make him.’ “As he spoke he reeled, and fell sprawling face upwards on the ground.
His great neck hung heavily backwards and a deep sleep took hold upon him.
Presently he turned sick, and threw up both wine and the gobbets of human flesh on which he had been gorging, for he was very drunk.
Then I thrust the beam of wood far into the embers to heat it, and encouraged my men lest any of them should turn faint-hearted.
When the wood, green though it was, was about to blaze, I drew it out of the fire glowing with heat, and my men gathered round me, for heaven had filled their hearts with courage.
We drove the sharp end of the beam into the monster’s eye, and bearing upon it with all my weight I kept turning it round and round as though I were boring a hole in a ship’s plank with an auger, which two men with a wheel and strap can keep on turning as long as they choose.
Even thus did we bore the red hot beam into his eye, till the boiling blood bubbled all over it as we worked it round and round, so that the steam from the burning eyeball scalded his eyelids and eyebrows, and the roots of the eye sputtered in the fire.
As a blacksmith plunges an axe or hatchet into cold water to temper it—for it is this that gives strength to the iron—and it makes a great hiss as he does so, even thus did the Cyclops’ eye hiss round the beam of olive wood, and his hideous yells made the cave ring again.
We ran away in a fright, but he plucked the beam all besmirched with gore from his eye, and hurled it from him in a frenzy of rage and pain, shouting as he did so to the other Cyclopes who lived on the bleak headlands near him; so they gathered from all quarters round his cave when they heard him crying, and asked what was the matter with him.
“‘What ails you, Polyphemus,’ said they, ‘that you make such a noise, breaking the stillness of the night, and preventing us from being able to sleep?
Surely no man is carrying off your sheep?
Surely no man is trying to kill you either by fraud or by force?’ “But Polyphemus shouted to them from inside the cave, ‘Noman is killing me by fraud; no man is killing me by force.’ “‘Then,’ said they, ‘if no man is attacking you, you must be ill; when Jove makes people ill, there is no help for it, and you had better pray to your father Neptune.’ “Then they went away, and I laughed inwardly at the success of my clever stratagem, but the Cyclops, groaning and in an agony of pain, felt about with his hands till he found the stone and took it from the door; then he sat in the doorway and stretched his hands in front of it to catch anyone going out with the sheep, for he thought I might be foolish enough to attempt this.
“As for myself I kept on puzzling to think how I could best save my own life and those of my companions; I schemed and schemed, as one who knows that his life depends upon it, for the danger was very great.
In the end I deemed that this plan would be the best; the male sheep were well grown, and carried a heavy black fleece, so I bound them noiselessly in threes together, with some of the withies on which the wicked monster used to sleep.
There was to be a man under the middle sheep, and the two on either side were to cover him, so that there were three sheep to each man.
As for myself there was a ram finer than any of the others, so I caught hold of him by the back, esconced myself in the thick wool under his belly, and hung on patiently to his fleece, face upwards, keeping a firm hold on it all the time.
“Thus, then, did we wait in great fear of mind till morning came, but when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, the male sheep hurried out to feed, while the ewes remained bleating about the pens waiting to be milked, for their udders were full to bursting; but their master in spite of all his pain felt the backs of all the sheep as they stood upright, without being sharp enough to find out that the men were underneath their bellies.
As the ram was going out, last of all, heavy with its fleece and with the weight of my crafty self, Polyphemus laid hold of it and said: “‘My good ram, what is it that makes you the last to leave my cave this morning?
You are not wont to let the ewes go before you, but lead the mob with a run whether to flowery mead or bubbling fountain, and are the first to come home again at night; but now you lag last of all.
Is it because you know your master has lost his eye, and are sorry because that wicked Noman and his horrid crew has got him down in his drink and blinded him?
But I will have his life yet.
If you could understand and talk, you would tell me where the wretch is hiding, and I would dash his brains upon the ground till they flew all over the cave.
I should thus have some satisfaction for the harm this no-good Noman has done me.’ “As he spoke he drove the ram outside, but when we were a little way out from the cave and yards, I first got from under the ram’s belly, and then freed my comrades; as for the sheep, which were very fat, by constantly heading them in the right direction we managed to drive them down to the ship.
The crew rejoiced greatly at seeing those of us who had escaped death, but wept for the others whom the Cyclops had killed.
However, I made signs to them by nodding and frowning that they were to hush their crying, and told them to get all the sheep on board at once and put out to sea; so they went aboard, took their places, and smote the grey sea with their oars.
Then, when I had got as far out as my voice would reach, I began to jeer at the Cyclops.
“‘Cyclops,’ said I, ‘you should have taken better measure of your man before eating up his comrades in your cave.
You wretch, eat up your visitors in your own house?
You might have known that your sin would find you out, and now Jove and the other gods have punished you.’ “He got more and more furious as he heard me, so he tore the top from off a high mountain, and flung it just in front of my ship so that it was within a little of hitting the end of the rudder.81 The sea quaked as the rock fell into it, and the wash of the wave it raised carried us back towards the mainland, and forced us towards the shore.
But I snatched up a long pole and kept the ship off, making signs to my men by nodding my head, that they must row for their lives, whereon they laid out with a will.
When we had got twice as far as we were before, I was for jeering at the Cyclops again, but the men begged and prayed of me to hold my tongue.
“‘Do not,’ they exclaimed, ‘be mad enough to provoke this savage creature further; he has thrown one rock at us already which drove us back again to the mainland, and we made sure it had been the death of us; if he had then heard any further sound of voices he would have pounded our heads and our ship’s timbers into a jelly with the rugged rocks he would have heaved at us, for he can throw them a long way.’ “But I would not listen to them, and shouted out to him in my rage, ‘Cyclops, if any one asks you who it was that put your eye out and spoiled your beauty, say it was the valiant warrior Ulysses, son of Laertes, who lives in Ithaca.’ “On this he groaned, and cried out, ‘Alas, alas, then the old prophecy about me is coming true.
There was a prophet here, at one time, a man both brave and of great stature, Telemus son of Eurymus, who was an excellent seer, and did all the prophesying for the Cyclopes till he grew old; he told me that all this would happen to me some day, and said I should lose my sight by the hand of Ulysses.
I have been all along expecting some one of imposing presence and superhuman strength, whereas he turns out to be a little insignificant weakling, who has managed to blind my eye by taking advantage of me in my drink; come here, then, Ulysses, that I may make you presents to show my hospitality, and urge Neptune to help you forward on your journey—for Neptune and I are father and son.
He, if he so will, shall heal me, which no one else neither god nor man can do.’ “Then I said, ‘I wish I could be as sure of killing you outright and sending you down to the house of Hades, as I am that it will take more than Neptune to cure that eye of yours.’ “On this he lifted up his hands to the firmament of heaven and prayed, saying, ‘Hear me, great Neptune; if I am indeed your own true begotten son, grant that Ulysses may never reach his home alive; or if he must get back to his friends at last, let him do so late and in sore plight after losing all his men [let him reach his home in another man’s ship and find trouble in his house.’82 “Thus did he pray, and Neptune heard his prayer.
Then he picked up a rock much larger than the first, swung it aloft and hurled it with prodigious force.
It fell just short of the ship, but was within a little of hitting the end of the rudder.
The sea quaked as the rock fell into it, and the wash of the wave it raised drove us onwards on our way towards the shore of the island.
“When at last we got to the island where we had left the rest of our ships, we found our comrades lamenting us, and anxiously awaiting our return.
We ran our vessel upon the sands and got out of her on to the sea shore; we also landed the Cyclops’ sheep, and divided them equitably amongst us so that none might have reason to complain.
As for the ram, my companions agreed that I should have it as an extra share; so I sacrificed it on the sea shore, and burned its thigh bones to Jove, who is the lord of all.
But he heeded not my sacrifice, and only thought how he might destroy both my ships and my comrades.
“Thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun we feasted our fill on meat and drink, but when the sun went down and it came on dark, we camped upon the beach.
When the child of morning rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, I bade my men on board and loose the hawsers.
Then they took their places and smote the grey sea with their oars; so we sailed on with sorrow in our hearts, but glad to have escaped death though we had lost our comrades.
BOOK X AEOLUS, THE LAESTRYGONES, CIRCE.
“Thence we went on to the Aeolian island where lives Aeolus son of Hippotas, dear to the immortal gods.
It is an island that floats (as it were) upon the sea,83 iron bound with a wall that girds it.
Now, Aeolus has six daughters and six lusty sons, so he made the sons marry the daughters, and they all live with their dear father and mother, feasting and enjoying every conceivable kind of luxury.
All day long the atmosphere of the house is loaded with the savour of roasting meats till it groans again, yard and all; but by night they sleep on their well made bedsteads, each with his own wife between the blankets.
These were the people among whom we had now come.
“Aeolus entertained me for a whole month asking me questions all the time about Troy, the Argive fleet, and the return of the Achaeans.
I told him exactly how everything had happened, and when I said I must go, and asked him to further me on my way, he made no sort of difficulty, but set about doing so at once.
Moreover, he flayed me a prime ox-hide to hold the ways of the roaring winds, which he shut up in the hide as in a sack—for Jove had made him captain over the winds, and he could stir or still each one of them according to his own pleasure.
He put the sack in the ship and bound the mouth so tightly with a silver thread that not even a breath of a side-wind could blow from any quarter.
The West wind which was fair for us did he alone let blow as it chose; but it all came to nothing, for we were lost through our own folly.
“Nine days and nine nights did we sail, and on the tenth day our native land showed on the horizon.
We got so close in that we could see the stubble fires burning, and I, being then dead beat, fell into a light sleep, for I had never let the rudder out of my own hands, that we might get home the faster.
On this the men fell to talking among themselves, and said I was bringing back gold and silver in the sack that Aeolus had given me.
‘Bless my heart,’ would one turn to his neighbour, saying, ‘how this man gets honoured and makes friends to whatever city or country he may go.
See what fine prizes he is taking home from Troy, while we, who have travelled just as far as he has, come back with hands as empty as we set out with—and now Aeolus has given him ever so much more.
Quick—let us see what it all is, and how much gold and silver there is in the sack he gave him.’ “Thus they talked and evil counsels prevailed.
They loosed the sack, whereupon the wind flew howling forth and raised a storm that carried us weeping out to sea and away from our own country.
Then I awoke, and knew not whether to throw myself into the sea or to live on and make the best of it; but I bore it, covered myself up, and lay down in the ship, while the men lamented bitterly as the fierce winds bore our fleet back to the Aeolian island.
“When we reached it we went ashore to take in water, and dined hard by the ships.
Immediately after dinner I took a herald and one of my men and went straight to the house of Aeolus, where I found him feasting with his wife and family; so we sat down as suppliants on the threshold.
They were astounded when they saw us and said, ‘Ulysses, what brings you here?
What god has been ill-treating you?
We took great pains to further you on your way home to Ithaca, or wherever it was that you wanted to go to.’ “Thus did they speak, but I answered sorrowfully, ‘My men have undone me; they, and cruel sleep, have ruined me.
My friends, mend me this mischief, for you can if you will.’ “I spoke as movingly as I could, but they said nothing, till their father answered, ‘Vilest of mankind, get you gone at once out of the island; him whom heaven hates will I in no wise help.
Be off, for you come here as one abhorred of heaven.’ And with these words he sent me sorrowing from his door.
“Thence we sailed sadly on till the men were worn out with long and fruitless rowing, for there was no longer any wind to help them.
Six days, night and day did we toil, and on the seventh day we reached the rocky stronghold of Lamus—Telepylus, the city of the Laestrygonians, where the shepherd who is driving in his sheep and goats [to be milked] salutes him who is driving out his flock [to feed] and this last answers the salute.
In that country a man who could do without sleep might earn double wages, one as a herdsman of cattle, and another as a shepherd, for they work much the same by night as they do by day.84 “When we reached the harbour we found it land-locked under steep cliffs, with a narrow entrance between two headlands.
My captains took all their ships inside, and made them fast close to one another, for there was never so much as a breath of wind inside, but it was always dead calm.
I kept my own ship outside, and moored it to a rock at the very end of the point; then I climbed a high rock to reconnoitre, but could see no sign neither of man nor cattle, only some smoke rising from the ground.
So I sent two of my company with an attendant to find out what sort of people the inhabitants were.
“The men when they got on shore followed a level road by which the people draw their firewood from the mountains into the town, till presently they met a young woman who had come outside to fetch water, and who was daughter to a Laestrygonian named Antiphates.
She was going to the fountain Artacia from which the people bring in their water, and when my men had come close up to her, they asked her who the king of that country might be, and over what kind of people he ruled; so she directed them to her father’s house, but when they got there they found his wife to be a giantess as huge as a mountain, and they were horrified at the sight of her.
“She at once called her husband Antiphates from the place of assembly, and forthwith he set about killing my men.
He snatched up one of them, and began to make his dinner off him then and there, whereon the other two ran back to the ships as fast as ever they could.
But Antiphates raised a hue-and-cry after them, and thousands of sturdy Laestrygonians sprang up from every quarter—ogres, not men.
They threw vast rocks at us from the cliffs as though they had been mere stones, and I heard the horrid sound of the ships crunching up against one another, and the death cries of my men, as the Laestrygonians speared them like fishes and took them home to eat them.
While they were thus killing my men within the harbour I drew my sword, cut the cable of my own ship, and told my men to row with all their might if they too would not fare like the rest; so they laid out for their lives, and we were thankful enough when we got into open water out of reach of the rocks they hurled at us.
As for the others there was not one of them left.
“Thence we sailed sadly on, glad to have escaped death, though we had lost our comrades, and came to the Aeaean island, where Circe lives—a great and cunning goddess who is own sister to the magician Aeetes—for they are both children of the sun by Perse, who is daughter to Oceanus.
We brought our ship into a safe harbour without a word, for some god guided us thither, and having landed we lay there for two days and two nights, worn out in body and mind.
When the morning of the third day came I took my spear and my sword, and went away from the ship to reconnoitre, and see if I could discover signs of human handiwork, or hear the sound of voices.
Climbing to the top of a high look-out I espied the smoke of Circe’s house rising upwards amid a dense forest of trees, and when I saw this I doubted whether, having seen the smoke, I would not go on at once and find out more, but in the end I deemed it best to go back to the ship, give the men their dinners, and send some of them instead of going myself.
“When I had nearly got back to the ship some god took pity upon my solitude, and sent a fine antlered stag right into the middle of my path.
He was coming down his pasture in the forest to drink of the river, for the heat of the sun drove him, and as he passed I struck him in the middle of the back; the bronze point of the spear went clean through him, and he lay groaning in the dust until the life went out of him.
Then I set my foot upon him, drew my spear from the wound, and laid it down; I also gathered rough grass and rushes and twisted them into a fathom or so of good stout rope, with which I bound the four feet of the noble creature together; having so done I hung him round my neck and walked back to the ship leaning upon my spear, for the stag was much too big for me to be able to carry him on my shoulder, steadying him with one hand.
As I threw him down in front of the ship, I called the men and spoke cheeringly man by man to each of them.
‘Look here my friends,’ said I, ‘we are not going to die so much before our time after all, and at any rate we will not starve so long as we have got something to eat and drink on board.’ On this they uncovered their heads upon the sea shore and admired the stag, for he was indeed a splendid fellow.
Then, when they had feasted their eyes upon him sufficiently, they washed their hands and began to cook him for dinner.
“Thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun we stayed there eating and drinking our fill, but when the sun went down and it came on dark, we camped upon the sea shore.
When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, I called a council and said, ‘My friends, we are in very great difficulties; listen therefore to me.
We have no idea where the sun either sets or rises,85 so that we do not even know East from West.
I see no way out of it; nevertheless, we must try and find one.
We are certainly on an island, for I went as high as I could this morning, and saw the sea reaching all round it to the horizon; it lies low, but towards the middle I saw smoke rising from out of a thick forest of trees.’ “Their hearts sank as they heard me, for they remembered how they had been treated by the Laestrygonian Antiphates, and by the savage ogre Polyphemus.
They wept bitterly in their dismay, but there was nothing to be got by crying, so I divided them into two companies and set a captain over each; I gave one company to Eurylochus, while I took command of the other myself.
Then we cast lots in a helmet, and the lot fell upon Eurylochus; so he set out with his twenty-two men, and they wept, as also did we who were left behind.
“When they reached Circe’s house they found it built of cut stones, on a site that could be seen from far, in the middle of the forest.
There were wild mountain wolves and lions prowling all round it—poor bewitched creatures whom she had tamed by her enchantments and drugged into subjection.
They did not attack my men, but wagged their great tails, fawned upon them, and rubbed their noses lovingly against them.86 As hounds crowd round their master when they see him coming from dinner—for they know he will bring them something—even so did these wolves and lions with their great claws fawn upon my men, but the men were terribly frightened at seeing such strange creatures.
Presently they reached the gates of the goddess’s house, and as they stood there they could hear Circe within, singing most beautifully as she worked at her loom, making a web so fine, so soft, and of such dazzling colours as no one but a goddess could weave.
On this Polites, whom I valued and trusted more than any other of my men, said, ‘There is some one inside working at a loom and singing most beautifully; the whole place resounds with it, let us call her and see whether she is woman or goddess.’ “They called her and she came down, unfastened the door, and bade them enter.
They, thinking no evil, followed her, all except Eurylochus, who suspected mischief and staid outside.
When she had got them into her house, she set them upon benches and seats and mixed them a mess with cheese, honey, meal, and Pramnian wine, but she drugged it with wicked poisons to make them forget their homes, and when they had drunk she turned them into pigs by a stroke of her wand, and shut them up in her pig-styes.
They were like pigs—head, hair, and all, and they grunted just as pigs do; but their senses were the same as before, and they remembered everything.
“Thus then were they shut up squealing, and Circe threw them some acorns and beech masts such as pigs eat, but Eurylochus hurried back to tell me about the sad fate of our comrades.
He was so overcome with dismay that though he tried to speak he could find no words to do so; his eyes filled with tears and he could only sob and sigh, till at last we forced his story out of him, and he told us what had happened to the others.
“‘We went,’ said he, ‘as you told us, through the forest, and in the middle of it there was a fine house built with cut stones in a place that could be seen from far.
There we found a woman, or else she was a goddess, working at her loom and singing sweetly; so the men shouted to her and called her, whereon she at once came down, opened the door, and invited us in.
The others did not suspect any mischief so they followed her into the house, but I staid where I was, for I thought there might be some treachery.
From that moment I saw them no more, for not one of them ever came out, though I sat a long time watching for them.’ “Then I took my sword of bronze and slung it over my shoulders; I also took my bow, and told Eurylochus to come back with me and shew me the way.
But he laid hold of me with both his hands and spoke piteously, saying, ‘Sir, do not force me to go with you, but let me stay here, for I know you will not bring one of them back with you, nor even return alive yourself; let us rather see if we cannot escape at any rate with the few that are left us, for we may still save our lives.’ “‘Stay where you are, then,’ answered I, ‘eating and drinking at the ship, but I must go, for I am most urgently bound to do so.’ “With this I left the ship and went up inland.
When I got through the charmed grove, and was near the great house of the enchantress Circe, I met Mercury with his golden wand, disguised as a young man in the hey-day of his youth and beauty with the down just coming upon his face.
He came up to me and took my hand within his own, saying, ‘My poor unhappy man, whither are you going over this mountain top, alone and without knowing the way?
Your men are shut up in Circe’s pigstyes, like so many wild boars in their lairs.
You surely do not fancy that you can set them free?
I can tell you that you will never get back and will have to stay there with the rest of them.
But never mind, I will protect you and get you out of your difficulty.
Take this herb, which is one of great virtue, and keep it about you when you go to Circe’s house, it will be a talisman to you against every kind of mischief.
“‘And I will tell you of all the wicked witchcraft that Circe will try to practice upon you.
She will mix a mess for you to drink, and she will drug the meal with which she makes it, but she will not be able to charm you, for the virtue of the herb that I shall give you will prevent her spells from working.
I will tell you all about it.
When Circe strikes you with her wand, draw your sword and spring upon her as though you were going to kill her.
She will then be frightened, and will desire you to go to bed with her; on this you must not point blank refuse her, for you want her to set your companions free, and to take good care also of yourself, but you must make her swear solemnly by all the blessed gods that she will plot no further mischief against you, or else when she has got you naked she will unman you and make you fit for nothing.’ “As he spoke he pulled the herb out of the ground and shewed me what it was like.
The root was black, while the flower was as white as milk; the gods call it Moly, and mortal men cannot uproot it, but the gods can do whatever they like.
“Then Mercury went back to high Olympus passing over the wooded island; but I fared onward to the house of Circe, and my heart was clouded with care as I walked along.
When I got to the gates I stood there and called the goddess, and as soon as she heard me she came down, opened the door, and asked me to come in; so I followed her—much troubled in my mind.
She set me on a richly decorated seat inlaid with silver, there was a footstool also under my feet, and she mixed a mess in a golden goblet for me to drink; but she drugged it, for she meant me mischief.
When she had given it me, and I had drunk it without its charming me, she struck me with her wand.
‘There now,’ she cried, ‘be off to the pigstye, and make your lair with the rest of them.’ “But I rushed at her with my sword drawn as though I would kill her, whereon she fell with a loud scream, clasped my knees, and spoke piteously, saying, ‘Who and whence are you?
from what place and people have you come?
How can it be that my drugs have no power to charm you?
Never yet was any man able to stand so much as a taste of the herb I gave you; you must be spell-proof; surely you can be none other than the bold hero Ulysses, who Mercury always said would come here some day with his ship while on his way home from Troy; so be it then; sheathe your sword and let us go to bed, that we may make friends and learn to trust each other.’ “And I answered, ‘Circe, how can you expect me to be friendly with you when you have just been turning all my men into pigs?
And now that you have got me here myself, you mean me mischief when you ask me to go to bed with you, and will unman me and make me fit for nothing.
I shall certainly not consent to go to bed with you unless you will first take your solemn oath to plot no further harm against me.’ “So she swore at once as I had told her, and when she had completed her oath then I went to bed with her.
“Meanwhile her four servants, who are her housemaids, set about their work.
They are the children of the groves and fountains, and of the holy waters that run down into the sea.
One of them spread a fair purple cloth over a seat, and laid a carpet underneath it.
Another brought tables of silver up to the seats, and set them with baskets of gold.
A third mixed some sweet wine with water in a silver bowl and put golden cups upon the tables, while the fourth brought in water and set it to boil in a large cauldron over a good fire which she had lighted.
When the water in the cauldron was boiling,87 she poured cold into it till it was just as I liked it, and then she set me in a bath and began washing me from the cauldron about the head and shoulders, to take the tire and stiffness out of my limbs.
As soon as she had done washing me and anointing me with oil, she arrayed me in a good cloak and shirt and led me to a richly decorated seat inlaid with silver; there was a footstool also under my feet.
A maid servant then brought me water in a beautiful golden ewer and poured it into a silver basin for me to wash my hands, and she drew a clean table beside me; an upper servant brought me bread and offered me many things of what there was in the house, and then Circe bade me eat, but I would not, and sat without heeding what was before me, still moody and suspicious.
“When Circe saw me sitting there without eating, and in great grief, she came to me and said, ‘Ulysses, why do you sit like that as though you were dumb, gnawing at your own heart, and refusing both meat and drink?
Is it that you are still suspicious?
You ought not to be, for I have already sworn solemnly that I will not hurt you.’ “And I said, ‘Circe, no man with any sense of what is right can think of either eating or drinking in your house until you have set his friends free and let him see them.
If you want me to eat and drink, you must free my men and bring them to me that I may see them with my own eyes.’ “When I had said this she went straight through the court with her wand in her hand and opened the pigstye doors.
My men came out like so many prime hogs and stood looking at her, but she went about among them and anointed each with a second drug, whereon the bristles that the bad drug had given them fell off, and they became men again, younger than they were before, and much taller and better looking.
They knew me at once, seized me each of them by the hand, and wept for joy till the whole house was filled with the sound of their halloa-ballooing, and Circe herself was so sorry for them that she came up to me and said, ‘Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, go back at once to the sea where you have left your ship, and first draw it on to the land.
Then, hide all your ship’s gear and property in some cave, and come back here with your men.’ “I agreed to this, so I went back to the sea shore, and found the men at the ship weeping and wailing most piteously.
When they saw me the silly blubbering fellows began frisking round me as calves break out and gambol round their mothers, when they see them coming home to be milked after they have been feeding all day, and the homestead resounds with their lowing.
They seemed as glad to see me as though they had got back to their own rugged Ithaca, where they had been born and bred.
‘Sir,’ said the affectionate creatures, ‘we are as glad to see you back as though we had got safe home to Ithaca; but tell us all about the fate of our comrades.’ “I spoke comfortingly to them and said, ‘We must draw our ship on to the land, and hide the ship’s gear with all our property in some cave; then come with me all of you as fast as you can to Circe’s house, where you will find your comrades eating and drinking in the midst of great abundance.’ “On this the men would have come with me at once, but Eurylochus tried to hold them back and said, ‘Alas, poor wretches that we are, what will become of us?
Rush not on your ruin by going to the house of Circe, who will turn us all into pigs or wolves or lions, and we shall have to keep guard over her house.
Remember how the Cyclops treated us when our comrades went inside his cave, and Ulysses with them.
It was all through his sheer folly that those men lost their lives.’ “When I heard him I was in two minds whether or no to draw the keen blade that hung by my sturdy thigh and cut his head off in spite of his being a near relation of my own; but the men interceded for him and said, ‘Sir, if it may so be, let this fellow stay here and mind the ship, but take the rest of us with you to Circe’s house.’ “On this we all went inland, and Eurylochus was not left behind after all, but came on too, for he was frightened by the severe reprimand that I had given him.
“Meanwhile Circe had been seeing that the men who had been left behind were washed and anointed with olive oil; she had also given them woollen cloaks and shirts, and when we came we found them all comfortably at dinner in her house.
As soon as the men saw each other face to face and knew one another, they wept for joy and cried aloud till the whole palace rang again.
Thereon Circe came up to me and said, ‘Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, tell your men to leave off crying; I know how much you have all of you suffered at sea, and how ill you have fared among cruel savages on the mainland, but that is over now, so stay here, and eat and drink till you are once more as strong and hearty as you were when you left Ithaca; for at present you are weakened both in body and mind; you keep all the time thinking of the hardships you have suffered during your travels, so that you have no more cheerfulness left in you.’ “Thus did she speak and we assented.
We stayed with Circe for a whole twelvemonth feasting upon an untold quantity both of meat and wine.
But when the year had passed in the waning of moons and the long days had come round, my men called me apart and said, ‘Sir, it is time you began to think about going home, if so be you are to be spared to see your house and native country at all.’ “Thus did they speak and I assented.
Thereon through the livelong day to the going down of the sun we feasted our fill on meat and wine, but when the sun went down and it came on dark the men laid themselves down to sleep in the covered cloisters.
I, however, after I had got into bed with Circe, besought her by her knees, and the goddess listened to what I had got to say.
‘Circe,’ said I, ‘please to keep the promise you made me about furthering me on my homeward voyage.
I want to get back and so do my men, they are always pestering me with their complaints as soon as ever your back is turned.’ “And the goddess answered, ‘Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, you shall none of you stay here any longer if you do not want to, but there is another journey which you have got to take before you can sail homewards.
You must go to the house of Hades and of dread Proserpine to consult the ghost of the blind Theban prophet Teiresias, whose reason is still unshaken.
To him alone has Proserpine left his understanding even in death, but the other ghosts flit about aimlessly.’ “I was dismayed when I heard this.
I sat up in bed and wept, and would gladly have lived no longer to see the light of the sun, but presently when I was tired of weeping and tossing myself about, I said, ‘And who shall guide me upon this voyage—for the house of Hades is a port that no ship can reach.’ “‘You will want no guide,’ she answered; ‘raise your mast, set your white sails, sit quite still, and the North Wind will blow you there of itself.
When your ship has traversed the waters of Oceanus, you will reach the fertile shore of Proserpine’s country with its groves of tall poplars and willows that shed their fruit untimely; here beach your ship upon the shore of Oceanus, and go straight on to the dark abode of Hades.
You will find it near the place where the rivers Pyriphlegethon and Cocytus (which is a branch of the river Styx) flow into Acheron, and you will see a rock near it, just where the two roaring rivers run into one another.
“‘When you have reached this spot, as I now tell you, dig a trench a cubit or so in length, breadth, and depth, and pour into it as a drink-offering to all the dead, first, honey mixed with milk, then wine, and in the third place water—sprinkling white barley meal over the whole.
Moreover you must offer many prayers to the poor feeble ghosts, and promise them that when you get back to Ithaca you will sacrifice a barren heifer to them, the best you have, and will load the pyre with good things.
More particularly you must promise that Teiresias shall have a black sheep all to himself, the finest in all your flocks.
“‘When you shall have thus besought the ghosts with your prayers, offer them a ram and a black ewe, bending their heads towards Erebus; but yourself turn away from them as though you would make towards the river.
On this, many dead men’s ghosts will come to you, and you must tell your men to skin the two sheep that you have just killed, and offer them as a burnt sacrifice with prayers to Hades and to Proserpine.
Then draw your sword and sit there, so as to prevent any other poor ghost from coming near the spilt blood before Teiresias shall have answered your questions.
The seer will presently come to you, and will tell you about your voyage—what stages you are to make, and how you are to sail the sea so as to reach your home.’ “It was day-break by the time she had done speaking, so she dressed me in my shirt and cloak.
As for herself she threw a beautiful light gossamer fabric over her shoulders, fastening it with a golden girdle round her waist, and she covered her head with a mantle.
Then I went about among the men everywhere all over the house, and spoke kindly to each of them man by man: ‘You must not lie sleeping here any longer,’ said I to them, ‘we must be going, for Circe has told me all about it.’ And on this they did as I bade them.
“Even so, however, I did not get them away without misadventure.
We had with us a certain youth named Elpenor, not very remarkable for sense or courage, who had got drunk and was lying on the house-top away from the rest of the men, to sleep off his liquor in the cool.
When he heard the noise of the men bustling about, he jumped up on a sudden and forgot all about coming down by the main staircase, so he tumbled right off the roof and broke his neck, and his soul went down to the house of Hades.
“When I had got the men together I said to them, ‘You think you are about to start home again, but Circe has explained to me that instead of this, we have got to go to the house of Hades and Proserpine to consult the ghost of the Theban prophet Teiresias.’ “The men were broken-hearted as they heard me, and threw themselves on the ground groaning and tearing their hair, but they did not mend matters by crying.
When we reached the sea shore, weeping and lamenting our fate, Circe brought the ram and the ewe, and we made them fast hard by the ship.
She passed through the midst of us without our knowing it, for who can see the comings and goings of a god, if the god does not wish to be seen?
BOOK XI THE VISIT TO THE DEAD.88 “Then, when we had got down to the sea shore we drew our ship into the water and got her mast and sails into her; we also put the sheep on board and took our places, weeping and in great distress of mind.
Circe, that great and cunning goddess, sent us a fair wind that blew dead aft and staid steadily with us keeping our sails all the time well filled; so we did whatever wanted doing to the ship’s gear and let her go as the wind and helmsman headed her.
All day long her sails were full as she held her course over the sea, but when the sun went down and darkness was over all the earth, we got into the deep waters of the river Oceanus, where lie the land and city of the Cimmerians who live enshrouded in mist and darkness which the rays of the sun never pierce neither at his rising nor as he goes down again out of the heavens, but the poor wretches live in one long melancholy night.
When we got there we beached the ship, took the sheep out of her, and went along by the waters of Oceanus till we came to the place of which Circe had told us.
“Here Perimedes and Eurylochus held the victims, while I drew my sword and dug the trench a cubit each way.
I made a drink-offering to all the dead, first with honey and milk, then with wine, and thirdly with water, and I sprinkled white barley meal over the whole, praying earnestly to the poor feckless ghosts, and promising them that when I got back to Ithaca I would sacrifice a barren heifer for them, the best I had, and would load the pyre with good things.
I also particularly promised that Teiresias should have a black sheep to himself, the best in all my flocks.
When I had prayed sufficiently to the dead, I cut the throats of the two sheep and let the blood run into the trench, whereon the ghosts came trooping up from Erebus—brides,89 young bachelors, old men worn out with toil, maids who had been crossed in love, and brave men who had been killed in battle, with their armour still smirched with blood; they came from every quarter and flitted round the trench with a strange kind of screaming sound that made me turn pale with fear.
When I saw them coming I told the men to be quick and flay the carcasses of the two dead sheep and make burnt offerings of them, and at the same time to repeat prayers to Hades and to Proserpine; but I sat where I was with my sword drawn and would not let the poor feckless ghosts come near the blood till Teiresias should have answered my questions.
“The first ghost that came was that of my comrade Elpenor, for he had not yet been laid beneath the earth.
We had left his body unwaked and unburied in Circe’s house, for we had had too much else to do.
I was very sorry for him, and cried when I saw him: ‘Elpenor,’ said I, ‘how did you come down here into this gloom and darkness?
You have got here on foot quicker than I have with my ship.’ “‘Sir,’ he answered with a groan, ‘it was all bad luck, and my own unspeakable drunkenness.
I was lying asleep on the top of Circe’s house, and never thought of coming down again by the great staircase but fell right off the roof and broke my neck, so my soul came down to the house of Hades.
And now I beseech you by all those whom you have left behind you, though they are not here, by your wife, by the father who brought you up when you were a child, and by Telemachus who is the one hope of your house, do what I shall now ask you.
I know that when you leave this limbo you will again hold your ship for the Aeaean island.
Do not go thence leaving me unwaked and unburied behind you, or I may bring heaven’s anger upon you; but burn me with whatever armour I have, build a barrow for me on the sea shore, that may tell people in days to come what a poor unlucky fellow I was, and plant over my grave the oar I used to row with when I was yet alive and with my messmates.’ And I said, ‘My poor fellow, I will do all that you have asked of me.’ “Thus, then, did we sit and hold sad talk with one another, I on the one side of the trench with my sword held over the blood, and the ghost of my comrade saying all this to me from the other side.
Then came the ghost of my dead mother Anticlea, daughter to Autolycus.
I had left her alive when I set out for Troy and was moved to tears when I saw her, but even so, for all my sorrow I would not let her come near the blood till I had asked my questions of Teiresias.
“Then came also the ghost of Theban Teiresias, with his golden sceptre in his hand.
He knew me and said, ‘Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, why, poor man, have you left the light of day and come down to visit the dead in this sad place?
Stand back from the trench and withdraw your sword that I may drink of the blood and answer your questions truly.’ “So I drew back, and sheathed my sword, whereon when he had drank of the blood he began with his prophecy.
“‘You want to know,’ said he, ‘about your return home, but heaven will make this hard for you.
I do not think that you will escape the eye of Neptune, who still nurses his bitter grudge against you for having blinded his son.
Still, after much suffering you may get home if you can restrain yourself and your companions when your ship reaches the Thrinacian island, where you will find the sheep and cattle belonging to the sun, who sees and gives ear to everything.
If you leave these flocks unharmed and think of nothing but of getting home, you may yet after much hardship reach Ithaca; but if you harm them, then I forewarn you of the destruction both of your ship and of your men.
Even though you may yourself escape, you will return in bad plight after losing all your men, [in another man’s ship, and you will find trouble in your house, which will be overrun by high-handed people, who are devouring your substance under the pretext of paying court and making presents to your wife.
“‘When you get home you will take your revenge on these suitors; and after you have killed them by force or fraud in your own house, you must take a well made oar and carry it on and on, till you come to a country where the people have never heard of the sea and do not even mix salt with their food, nor do they know anything about ships, and oars that are as the wings of a ship.
I will give you this certain token which cannot escape your notice.
A wayfarer will meet you and will say it must be a winnowing shovel that you have got upon your shoulder; on this you must fix the oar in the ground and sacrifice a ram, a bull, and a boar to Neptune.90 Then go home and offer hecatombs to all the gods in heaven one after the other.
As for yourself, death shall come to you from the sea, and your life shall ebb away very gently when you are full of years and peace of mind, and your people shall bless you.
All that I have said will come true].’91 “‘This,’ I answered, ‘must be as it may please heaven, but tell me and tell me and tell me true, I see my poor mother’s ghost close by us; she is sitting by the blood without saying a word, and though I am her own son she does not remember me and speak to me; tell me, Sir, how I can make her know me.’ “‘That,’ said he, ‘I can soon do.
Any ghost that you let taste of the blood will talk with you like a reasonable being, but if you do not let them have any blood they will go away again.’ “On this the ghost of Teiresias went back to the house of Hades, for his prophecyings had now been spoken, but I sat still where I was until my mother came up and tasted the blood.
Then she knew me at once and spoke fondly to me, saying, ‘My son, how did you come down to this abode of darkness while you are still alive?
It is a hard thing for the living to see these places, for between us and them there are great and terrible waters, and there is Oceanus, which no man can cross on foot, but he must have a good ship to take him.
Are you all this time trying to find your way home from Troy, and have you never yet got back to Ithaca nor seen your wife in your own house?’ “‘Mother,’ said I, ‘I was forced to come here to consult the ghost of the Theban prophet Teiresias.
I have never yet been near the Achaean land nor set foot on my native country, and I have had nothing but one long series of misfortunes from the very first day that I set out with Agamemnon for Ilius, the land of noble steeds, to fight the Trojans.
But tell me, and tell me true, in what way did you die?
Did you have a long illness, or did heaven vouchsafe you a gentle easy passage to eternity?
Tell me also about my father, and the son whom I left behind me, is my property still in their hands, or has some one else got hold of it, who thinks that I shall not return to claim it?
Tell me again what my wife intends doing, and in what mind she is; does she live with my son and guard my estate securely, or has she made the best match she could and married again?’ “My mother answered, ‘Your wife still remains in your house, but she is in great distress of mind and spends her whole time in tears both night and day.
No one as yet has got possession of your fine property, and Telemachus still holds your lands undisturbed.
He has to entertain largely, as of course he must, considering his position as a magistrate,92 and how every one invites him; your father remains at his old place in the country and never goes near the town.
He has no comfortable bed nor bedding; in the winter he sleeps on the floor in front of the fire with the men and goes about all in rags, but in summer, when the warm weather comes on again, he lies out in the vineyard on a bed of vine leaves thrown any how upon the ground.
He grieves continually about your never having come home, and suffers more and more as he grows older.
As for my own end it was in this wise: heaven did not take me swiftly and painlessly in my own house, nor was I attacked by any illness such as those that generally wear people out and kill them, but my longing to know what you were doing and the force of my affection for you—this it was that was the death of me.’93 “Then I tried to find some way of embracing my poor mother’s ghost.
Thrice I sprang towards her and tried to clasp her in my arms, but each time she flitted from my embrace as it were a dream or phantom, and being touched to the quick I said to her, ‘Mother, why do you not stay still when I would embrace you?
If we could throw our arms around one another we might find sad comfort in the sharing of our sorrows even in the house of Hades; does Proserpine want to lay a still further load of grief upon me by mocking me with a phantom only?’ “‘My son,’ she answered, ‘most ill-fated of all mankind, it is not Proserpine that is beguiling you, but all people are like this when they are dead.
The sinews no longer hold the flesh and bones together; these perish in the fierceness of consuming fire as soon as life has left the body, and the soul flits away as though it were a dream.
Now, however, go back to the light of day as soon as you can, and note all these things that you may tell them to your wife hereafter.’ “Thus did we converse, and anon Proserpine sent up the ghosts of the wives and daughters of all the most famous men.
They gathered in crowds about the blood, and I considered how I might question them severally.
In the end I deemed that it would be best to draw the keen blade that hung by my sturdy thigh, and keep them from all drinking the blood at once.
So they came up one after the other, and each one as I questioned her told me her race and lineage.
“The first I saw was Tyro.
She was daughter of Salmoneus and wife of Cretheus the son of Aeolus.94 She fell in love with the river Enipeus who is much the most beautiful river in the whole world.
Once when she was taking a walk by his side as usual, Neptune, disguised as her lover, lay with her at the mouth of the river, and a huge blue wave arched itself like a mountain over them to hide both woman and god, whereon he loosed her virgin girdle and laid her in a deep slumber.
When the god had accomplished the deed of love, he took her hand in his own and said, ‘Tyro, rejoice in all good will; the embraces of the gods are not fruitless, and you will have fine twins about this time twelve months.
Take great care of them.
I am Neptune, so now go home, but hold your tongue and do not tell any one.’ “Then he dived under the sea, and she in due course bore Pelias and Neleus, who both of them served Jove with all their might.
Pelias was a great breeder of sheep and lived in Iolcus, but the other lived in Pylos.
The rest of her children were by Cretheus, namely, Aeson, Pheres, and Amythaon, who was a mighty warrior and charioteer.
“Next to her I saw Antiope, daughter to Asopus, who could boast of having slept in the arms of even Jove himself, and who bore him two sons Amphion and Zethus.
These founded Thebes with its seven gates, and built a wall all round it; for strong though they were they could not hold Thebes till they had walled it.
“Then I saw Alcmena, the wife of Amphitryon, who also bore to Jove indomitable Hercules; and Megara who was daughter to great King Creon, and married the redoubtable son of Amphitryon.
“I also saw fair Epicaste mother of king Oedipodes whose awful lot it was to marry her own son without suspecting it.
He married her after having killed his father, but the gods proclaimed the whole story to the world; whereon he remained king of Thebes, in great grief for the spite the gods had borne him; but Epicaste went to the house of the mighty jailor Hades, having hanged herself for grief, and the avenging spirits haunted him as for an outraged mother—to his ruing bitterly thereafter.
“Then I saw Chloris, whom Neleus married for her beauty, having given priceless presents for her.
She was youngest daughter to Amphion son of Iasus and king of Minyan Orchomenus, and was Queen in Pylos.
She bore Nestor, Chromius, and Periclymenus, and she also bore that marvellously lovely woman Pero, who was wooed by all the country round; but Neleus would only give her to him who should raid the cattle of Iphicles from the grazing grounds of Phylace, and this was a hard task.
The only man who would undertake to raid them was a certain excellent seer,95 but the will of heaven was against him, for the rangers of the cattle caught him and put him in prison; nevertheless when a full year had passed and the same season came round again, Iphicles set him at liberty, after he had expounded all the oracles of heaven.
Thus, then, was the will of Jove accomplished.
“And I saw Leda the wife of Tyndarus, who bore him two famous sons, Castor breaker of horses, and Pollux the mighty boxer.
Both these heroes are lying under the earth, though they are still alive, for by a special dispensation of Jove, they die and come to life again, each one of them every other day throughout all time, and they have the rank of gods.
“After her I saw Iphimedeia wife of Aloeus who boasted the embrace of Neptune.
She bore two sons Otus and Ephialtes, but both were short lived.
They were the finest children that were ever born in this world, and the best looking, Orion only excepted; for at nine years old they were nine fathoms high, and measured nine cubits round the chest.
They threatened to make war with the gods in Olympus, and tried to set Mount Ossa on the top of Mount Olympus, and Mount Pelion on the top of Ossa, that they might scale heaven itself, and they would have done it too if they had been grown up, but Apollo, son of Leto, killed both of them, before they had got so much as a sign of hair upon their cheeks or chin.
“Then I saw Phaedra, and Procris, and fair Ariadne daughter of the magician Minos, whom Theseus was carrying off from Crete to Athens, but he did not enjoy her, for before he could do so Diana killed her in the island of Dia on account of what Bacchus had said against her.
“I also saw Maera and Clymene and hateful Eriphyle, who sold her own husband for gold.
But it would take me all night if I were to name every single one of the wives and daughters of heroes whom I saw, and it is time for me to go to bed, either on board ship with my crew, or here.
As for my escort, heaven and yourselves will see to it.” Here he ended, and the guests sat all of them enthralled and speechless throughout the covered cloister.
Then Arete said to them:— “What do you think of this man, O Phaeacians?
Is he not tall and good looking, and is he not clever?
True, he is my own guest, but all of you share in the distinction.
Do not be in a hurry to send him away, nor niggardly in the presents you make to one who is in such great need, for heaven has blessed all of you with great abundance.” Then spoke the aged hero Echeneus who was one of the oldest men among them, “My friends,” said he, “what our august queen has just said to us is both reasonable and to the purpose, therefore be persuaded by it; but the decision whether in word or deed rests ultimately with King Alcinous.” “The thing shall be done,” exclaimed Alcinous, “as surely as I still live and reign over the Phaeacians.
Our guest is indeed very anxious to get home, still we must persuade him to remain with us until to-morrow, by which time I shall be able to get together the whole sum that I mean to give him.
As regards his escort it will be a matter for you all, and mine above all others as the chief person among you.” And Ulysses answered, “King Alcinous, if you were to bid me to stay here for a whole twelve months, and then speed me on my way, loaded with your noble gifts, I should obey you gladly and it would redound greatly to my advantage, for I should return fuller-handed to my own people, and should thus be more respected and beloved by all who see me when I get back to Ithaca.” “Ulysses,” replied Alcinous, “not one of us who sees you has any idea that you are a charlatan or a swindler.
I know there are many people going about who tell such plausible stories that it is very hard to see through them, but there is a style about your language which assures me of your good disposition.
Moreover you have told the story of your own misfortunes, and those of the Argives, as though you were a practiced bard; but tell me, and tell me true, whether you saw any of the mighty heroes who went to Troy at the same time with yourself, and perished there.
The evenings are still at their longest, and it is not yet bed time—go on, therefore, with your divine story, for I could stay here listening till tomorrow morning, so long as you will continue to tell us of your adventures.” “Alcinous,” answered Ulysses, “there is a time for making speeches, and a time for going to bed; nevertheless, since you so desire, I will not refrain from telling you the still sadder tale of those of my comrades who did not fall fighting with the Trojans, but perished on their return, through the treachery of a wicked woman.
“When Proserpine had dismissed the female ghosts in all directions, the ghost of Agamemnon son of Atreus came sadly up to me, surrounded by those who had perished with him in the house of Aegisthus.
As soon as he had tasted the blood, he knew me, and weeping bitterly stretched out his arms towards me to embrace me; but he had no strength nor substance any more, and I too wept and pitied him as I beheld him.
‘How did you come by your death,’ said I, ‘King Agamemnon?
Did Neptune raise his winds and waves against you when you were at sea, or did your enemies make an end of you on the main land when you were cattle-lifting or sheep-stealing, or while they were fighting in defence of their wives and city?’ “‘Ulysses,’ he answered, ‘noble son of Laertes, I was not lost at sea in any storm of Neptune’s raising, nor did my foes despatch me upon the mainland, but Aegisthus and my wicked wife were the death of me between them.
He asked me to his house, feasted me, and then butchered me most miserably as though I were a fat beast in a slaughter house, while all around me my comrades were slain like sheep or pigs for the wedding breakfast, or picnic, or gorgeous banquet of some great nobleman.
You must have seen numbers of men killed either in a general engagement, or in single combat, but you never saw anything so truly pitiable as the way in which we fell in that cloister, with the mixing bowl and the loaded tables lying all about, and the ground reeking with our blood.
I heard Priam’s daughter Cassandra scream as Clytemnestra killed her close beside me.
I lay dying upon the earth with the sword in my body, and raised my hands to kill the slut of a murderess, but she slipped away from me; she would not even close my lips nor my eyes when I was dying, for there is nothing in this world so cruel and so shameless as a woman when she has fallen into such guilt as hers was.
Fancy murdering her own husband!
I thought I was going to be welcomed home by my children and my servants, but her abominable crime has brought disgrace on herself and all women who shall come after—even on the good ones.’ “And I said, ‘In truth Jove has hated the house of Atreus from first to last in the matter of their women’s counsels.
See how many of us fell for Helen’s sake, and now it seems that Clytemnestra hatched mischief against you too during your absence.’ “‘Be sure, therefore,’ continued Agamemnon, ‘and not be too friendly even with your own wife.
Do not tell her all that you know perfectly well yourself.
Tell her a part only, and keep your own counsel about the rest.
Not that your wife, Ulysses, is likely to murder you, for Penelope is a very admirable woman, and has an excellent nature.
We left her a young bride with an infant at her breast when we set out for Troy.
This child no doubt is now grown up happily to man’s estate,96 and he and his father will have a joyful meeting and embrace one another as it is right they should do, whereas my wicked wife did not even allow me the happiness of looking upon my son, but killed me ere I could do so.
Furthermore I say—and lay my saying to your heart—do not tell people when you are bringing your ship to Ithaca, but steal a march upon them, for after all this there is no trusting women.
But now tell me, and tell me true, can you give me any news of my son Orestes?
Is he in Orchomenus, or at Pylos, or is he at Sparta with Menelaus—for I presume that he is still living.’ “And I said, ‘Agamemnon, why do you ask me?
I do not know whether your son is alive or dead, and it is not right to talk when one does not know.’ “As we two sat weeping and talking thus sadly with one another the ghost of Achilles came up to us with Patroclus, Antilochus, and Ajax who was the finest and goodliest man of all the Danaans after the son of Peleus.
The fleet descendant of Aeacus knew me and spoke piteously, saying, ‘Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, what deed of daring will you undertake next, that you venture down to the house of Hades among us silly dead, who are but the ghosts of them that can labour no more?’ “And I said, ‘Achilles, son of Peleus, foremost champion of the Achaeans, I came to consult Teiresias, and see if he could advise me about my return home to Ithaca, for I have never yet been able to get near the Achaean land, nor to set foot in my own country, but have been in trouble all the time.
As for you, Achilles, no one was ever yet so fortunate as you have been, nor ever will be, for you were adored by all us Argives as long as you were alive, and now that you are here you are a great prince among the dead.
Do not, therefore, take it so much to heart even if you are dead.’ “‘Say not a word,’ he answered, ‘in death’s favour; I would rather be a paid servant in a poor man’s house and be above ground than king of kings among the dead.
But give me news about my son; is he gone to the wars and will he be a great soldier, or is this not so?
Tell me also if you have heard anything about my father Peleus—does he still rule among the Myrmidons, or do they show him no respect throughout Hellas and Phthia now that he is old and his limbs fail him?
Could I but stand by his side, in the light of day, with the same strength that I had when I killed the bravest of our foes upon the plain of Troy—could I but be as I then was and go even for a short time to my father’s house, any one who tried to do him violence or supersede him would soon rue it.’ “‘I have heard nothing,’ I answered, ‘of Peleus, but I can tell you all about your son Neoptolemus, for I took him in my own ship from Scyros with the Achaeans.
In our councils of war before Troy he was always first to speak, and his judgement was unerring.
Nestor and I were the only two who could surpass him; and when it came to fighting on the plain of Troy, he would never remain with the body of his men, but would dash on far in front, foremost of them all in valour.
Many a man did he kill in battle—I cannot name every single one of those whom he slew while fighting on the side of the Argives, but will only say how he killed that valiant hero Eurypylus son of Telephus, who was the handsomest man I ever saw except Memnon; many others also of the Ceteians fell around him by reason of a woman’s bribes.
Moreover, when all the bravest of the Argives went inside the horse that Epeus had made, and it was left to me to settle when we should either open the door of our ambuscade, or close it, though all the other leaders and chief men among the Danaans were drying their eyes and quaking in every limb, I never once saw him turn pale nor wipe a tear from his cheek; he was all the time urging me to break out from the horse—grasping the handle of his sword and his bronze-shod spear, and breathing fury against the foe.
Yet when we had sacked the city of Priam he got his handsome share of the prize money and went on board (such is the fortune of war) without a wound upon him, neither from a thrown spear nor in close combat, for the rage of Mars is a matter of great chance.’ “When I had told him this, the ghost of Achilles strode off across a meadow full of asphodel, exulting over what I had said concerning the prowess of his son.
“The ghosts of other dead men stood near me and told me each his own melancholy tale; but that of Ajax son of Telamon alone held aloof—still angry with me for having won the cause in our dispute about the armour of Achilles.
Thetis had offered it as a prize, but the Trojan prisoners and Minerva were the judges.
Would that I had never gained the day in such a contest, for it cost the life of Ajax, who was foremost of all the Danaans after the son of Peleus, alike in stature and prowess.
“When I saw him I tried to pacify him and said, ‘Ajax, will you not forget and forgive even in death, but must the judgement about that hateful armour still rankle with you?
It cost us Argives dear enough to lose such a tower of strength as you were to us.
We mourned you as much as we mourned Achilles son of Peleus himself, nor can the blame be laid on anything but on the spite which Jove bore against the Danaans, for it was this that made him counsel your destruction—come hither, therefore, bring your proud spirit into subjection, and hear what I can tell you.’ “He would not answer, but turned away to Erebus and to the other ghosts; nevertheless, I should have made him talk to me in spite of his being so angry, or I should have gone on talking to him,97 only that there were still others among the dead whom I desired to see.
“Then I saw Minos son of Jove with his golden sceptre in his hand sitting in judgement on the dead, and the ghosts were gathered sitting and standing round him in the spacious house of Hades, to learn his sentences upon them.
“After him I saw huge Orion in a meadow full of asphodel driving the ghosts of the wild beasts that he had killed upon the mountains, and he had a great bronze club in his hand, unbreakable for ever and ever.
“And I saw Tityus son of Gaia stretched upon the plain and covering some nine acres of ground.
Two vultures on either side of him were digging their beaks into his liver, and he kept on trying to beat them off with his hands, but could not; for he had violated Jove’s mistress Leto as she was going through Panopeus on her way to Pytho.
“I saw also the dreadful fate of Tantalus, who stood in a lake that reached his chin; he was dying to quench his thirst, but could never reach the water, for whenever the poor creature stooped to drink, it dried up and vanished, so that there was nothing but dry ground—parched by the spite of heaven.
There were tall trees, moreover, that shed their fruit over his head—pears, pomegranates, apples, sweet figs and juicy olives, but whenever the poor creature stretched out his hand to take some, the wind tossed the branches back again to the clouds.
“And I saw Sisyphus at his endless task raising his prodigious stone with both his hands.
With hands and feet he tried to roll it up to the top of the hill, but always, just before he could roll it over on to the other side, its weight would be too much for him, and the pitiless stone98 would come thundering down again on to the plain.
Then he would begin trying to push it up hill again, and the sweat ran off him and the steam rose after him.
“After him I saw mighty Hercules, but it was his phantom only, for he is feasting ever with the immortal gods, and has lovely Hebe to wife, who is daughter of Jove and Juno.
The ghosts were screaming round him like scared birds flying all whithers.
He looked black as night with his bare bow in his hands and his arrow on the string, glaring around as though ever on the point of taking aim.
About his breast there was a wondrous golden belt adorned in the most marvellous fashion with bears, wild boars, and lions with gleaming eyes; there was also war, battle, and death.
The man who made that belt, do what he might, would never be able to make another like it.
Hercules knew me at once when he saw me, and spoke piteously, saying, ‘My poor Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, are you too leading the same sorry kind of life that I did when I was above ground?
I was son of Jove, but I went through an infinity of suffering, for I became bondsman to one who was far beneath me—a low fellow who set me all manner of labours.
He once sent me here to fetch the hell-hound—for he did not think he could find anything harder for me than this, but I got the hound out of Hades and brought him to him, for Mercury and Minerva helped me.’ “On this Hercules went down again into the house of Hades, but I stayed where I was in case some other of the mighty dead should come to me.
And I should have seen still other of them that are gone before, whom I would fain have seen—Theseus and Pirithous—glorious children of the gods, but so many thousands of ghosts came round me and uttered such appalling cries, that I was panic stricken lest Proserpine should send up from the house of Hades the head of that awful monster Gorgon.
On this I hastened back to my ship and ordered my men to go on board at once and loose the hawsers; so they embarked and took their places, whereon the ship went down the stream of the river Oceanus.
We had to row at first, but presently a fair wind sprang up.
BOOK XII THE SIRENS, SCYLLA AND CHARYBDIS, THE CATTLE OF THE SUN.
“After we were clear of the river Oceanus, and had got out into the open sea, we went on till we reached the Aeaean island where there is dawn and sun-rise as in other places.
We then drew our ship on to the sands and got out of her on to the shore, where we went to sleep and waited till day should break.
“Then, when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, I sent some men to Circe’s house to fetch the body of Elpenor.
We cut firewood from a wood where the headland jutted out into the sea, and after we had wept over him and lamented him we performed his funeral rites.
When his body and armour had been burned to ashes, we raised a cairn, set a stone over it, and at the top of the cairn we fixed the oar that he had been used to row with.
“While we were doing all this, Circe, who knew that we had got back from the house of Hades, dressed herself and came to us as fast as she could; and her maid servants came with her bringing us bread, meat, and wine.
Then she stood in the midst of us and said, ‘You have done a bold thing in going down alive to the house of Hades, and you will have died twice, to other people’s once; now, then, stay here for the rest of the day, feast your fill, and go on with your voyage at daybreak tomorrow morning.
In the meantime I will tell Ulysses about your course, and will explain everything to him so as to prevent your suffering from misadventure either by land or sea.’ “We agreed to do as she had said, and feasted through the livelong day to the going down of the sun, but when the sun had set and it came on dark, the men laid themselves down to sleep by the stern cables of the ship.
Then Circe took me by the hand and bade me be seated away from the others, while she reclined by my side and asked me all about our adventures.
“‘So far so good,’ said she, when I had ended my story, ‘and now pay attention to what I am about to tell you—heaven itself, indeed, will recall it to your recollection.
First you will come to the Sirens who enchant all who come near them.
If any one unwarily draws in too close and hears the singing of the Sirens, his wife and children will never welcome him home again, for they sit in a green field and warble him to death with the sweetness of their song.
There is a great heap of dead men’s bones lying all around, with the flesh still rotting off them.
Therefore pass these Sirens by, and stop your men’s ears with wax that none of them may hear; but if you like you can listen yourself, for you may get the men to bind you as you stand upright on a cross piece half way up the mast,99 and they must lash the rope’s ends to the mast itself, that you may have the pleasure of listening.
If you beg and pray the men to unloose you, then they must bind you faster.
“‘When your crew have taken you past these Sirens, I cannot give you coherent directions100 as to which of two courses you are to take; I will lay the two alternatives before you, and you must consider them for yourself.
On the one hand there are some overhanging rocks against which the deep blue waves of Amphitrite beat with terrific fury; the blessed gods call these rocks the Wanderers.
Here not even a bird may pass, no, not even the timid doves that bring ambrosia to Father Jove, but the sheer rock always carries off one of them, and Father Jove has to send another to make up their number; no ship that ever yet came to these rocks has got away again, but the waves and whirlwinds of fire are freighted with wreckage and with the bodies of dead men.
The only vessel that ever sailed and got through, was the famous Argo on her way from the house of Aetes, and she too would have gone against these great rocks, only that Juno piloted her past them for the love she bore to Jason.
“‘Of these two rocks the one reaches heaven and its peak is lost in a dark cloud.
This never leaves it, so that the top is never clear not even in summer and early autumn.
No man though he had twenty hands and twenty feet could get a foothold on it and climb it, for it runs sheer up, as smooth as though it had been polished.
In the middle of it there is a large cavern, looking West and turned towards Erebus; you must take your ship this way, but the cave is so high up that not even the stoutest archer could send an arrow into it.
Inside it Scylla sits and yelps with a voice that you might take to be that of a young hound, but in truth she is a dreadful monster and no one—not even a god—could face her without being terror-struck.
She has twelve mis-shapen feet, and six necks of the most prodigious length; and at the end of each neck she has a frightful head with three rows of teeth in each, all set very close together, so that they would crunch any one to death in a moment, and she sits deep within her shady cell thrusting out her heads and peering all round the rock, fishing for dolphins or dogfish or any larger monster that she can catch, of the thousands with which Amphitrite teems.
No ship ever yet got past her without losing some men, for she shoots out all her heads at once, and carries off a man in each mouth.
“‘You will find the other rock lie lower, but they are so close together that there is not more than a bow-shot between them.
[A large fig tree in full leaf101 grows upon it], and under it lies the sucking whirlpool of Charybdis.
Three times in the day does she vomit forth her waters, and three times she sucks them down again; see that you be not there when she is sucking, for if you are, Neptune himself could not save you; you must hug the Scylla side and drive ship by as fast as you can, for you had better lose six men than your whole crew.’ “‘Is there no way,’ said I, ‘of escaping Charybdis, and at the same time keeping Scylla off when she is trying to harm my men?’ “‘You dare devil,’ replied the goddess, ‘you are always wanting to fight somebody or something; you will not let yourself be beaten even by the immortals.
For Scylla is not mortal; moreover she is savage, extreme, rude, cruel and invincible.
There is no help for it; your best chance will be to get by her as fast as ever you can, for if you dawdle about her rock while you are putting on your armour, she may catch you with a second cast of her six heads, and snap up another half dozen of your men; so drive your ship past her at full speed, and roar out lustily to Crataiis who is Scylla’s dam, bad luck to her; she will then stop her from making a second raid upon you.’ “‘You will now come to the Thrinacian island, and here you will see many herds of cattle and flocks of sheep belonging to the sun-god—seven herds of cattle and seven flocks of sheep, with fifty head in each flock.
They do not breed, nor do they become fewer in number, and they are tended by the goddesses Phaethusa and Lampetie, who are children of the sun-god Hyperion by Neaera.
Their mother when she had borne them and had done suckling them sent them to the Thrinacian island, which was a long way off, to live there and look after their father’s flocks and herds.
If you leave these flocks unharmed, and think of nothing but getting home, you may yet after much hardship reach Ithaca; but if you harm them, then I forewarn you of the destruction both of your ship and of your comrades; and even though you may yourself escape, you will return late, in bad plight, after losing all your men.’ “Here she ended, and dawn enthroned in gold began to show in heaven, whereon she returned inland.
I then went on board and told my men to loose the ship from her moorings; so they at once got into her, took their places, and began to smite the grey sea with their oars.
Presently the great and cunning goddess Circe befriended us with a fair wind that blew dead aft, and staid steadily with us, keeping our sails well filled, so we did whatever wanted doing to the ship’s gear, and let her go as wind and helmsman headed her.
“Then, being much troubled in mind, I said to my men, ‘My friends, it is not right that one or two of us alone should know the prophecies that Circe has made me, I will therefore tell you about them, so that whether we live or die we may do so with our eyes open.
First she said we were to keep clear of the Sirens, who sit and sing most beautifully in a field of flowers; but she said I might hear them myself so long as no one else did.
Therefore, take me and bind me to the crosspiece half way up the mast; bind me as I stand upright, with a bond so fast that I cannot possibly break away, and lash the rope’s ends to the mast itself.
If I beg and pray you to set me free, then bind me more tightly still.’ “I had hardly finished telling everything to the men before we reached the island of the two Sirens,102 for the wind had been very favourable.
Then all of a sudden it fell dead calm; there was not a breath of wind nor a ripple upon the water, so the men furled the sails and stowed them; then taking to their oars they whitened the water with the foam they raised in rowing.
Meanwhile I look a large wheel of wax and cut it up small with my sword.
Then I kneaded the wax in my strong hands till it became soft, which it soon did between the kneading and the rays of the sun-god son of Hyperion.
Then I stopped the ears of all my men, and they bound me hands and feet to the mast as I stood upright on the cross piece; but they went on rowing themselves.
When we had got within earshot of the land, and the ship was going at a good rate, the Sirens saw that we were getting in shore and began with their singing.
“‘Come here,’ they sang, ‘renowned Ulysses, honour to the Achaean name, and listen to our two voices.
No one ever sailed past us without staying to hear the enchanting sweetness of our song—and he who listens will go on his way not only charmed, but wiser, for we know all the ills that the gods laid upon the Argives and Trojans before Troy, and can tell you everything that is going to happen over the whole world.’ “They sang these words most musically, and as I longed to hear them further I made signs by frowning to my men that they should set me free; but they quickened their stroke, and Eurylochus and Perimedes bound me with still stronger bonds till we had got out of hearing of the Sirens’ voices.
Then my men took the wax from their ears and unbound me.
“Immediately after we had got past the island I saw a great wave from which spray was rising, and I heard a loud roaring sound.
The men were so frightened that they loosed hold of their oars, for the whole sea resounded with the rushing of the waters,103 but the ship stayed where it was, for the men had left off rowing.
I went round, therefore, and exhorted them man by man not to lose heart.
“‘My friends,’ said I, ‘this is not the first time that we have been in danger, and we are in nothing like so bad a case as when the Cyclops shut us up in his cave; nevertheless, my courage and wise counsel saved us then, and we shall live to look back on all this as well.
Now, therefore, let us all do as I say, trust in Jove and row on with might and main.
As for you, coxswain, these are your orders; attend to them, for the ship is in your hands; turn her head away from these steaming rapids and hug the rock, or she will give you the slip and be over yonder before you know where you are, and you will be the death of us.’ “So they did as I told them; but I said nothing about the awful monster Scylla, for I knew the men would not go on rowing if I did, but would huddle together in the hold.
In one thing only did I disobey Circe’s strict instructions—I put on my armour.
Then seizing two strong spears I took my stand on the ship’s bows, for it was there that I expected first to see the monster of the rock, who was to do my men so much harm; but I could not make her out anywhere, though I strained my eyes with looking the gloomy rock all over and over.
“Then we entered the Straits in great fear of mind, for on the one hand was Scylla, and on the other dread Charybdis kept sucking up the salt water.
As she vomited it up, it was like the water in a cauldron when it is boiling over upon a great fire, and the spray reached the top of the rocks on either side.
When she began to suck again, we could see the water all inside whirling round and round, and it made a deafening sound as it broke against the rocks.
We could see the bottom of the whirlpool all black with sand and mud, and the men were at their wits ends for fear.
While we were taken up with this, and were expecting each moment to be our last, Scylla pounced down suddenly upon us and snatched up my six best men.
I was looking at once after both ship and men, and in a moment I saw their hands and feet ever so high above me, struggling in the air as Scylla was carrying them off, and I heard them call out my name in one last despairing cry.
As a fisherman, seated, spear in hand, upon some jutting rock104 throws bait into the water to deceive the poor little fishes, and spears them with the ox’s horn with which his spear is shod, throwing them gasping on to the land as he catches them one by one—even so did Scylla land these panting creatures on her rock and munch them up at the mouth of her den, while they screamed and stretched out their hands to me in their mortal agony.
This was the most sickening sight that I saw throughout all my voyages.
“When we had passed the [Wandering] rocks, with Scylla and terrible Charybdis, we reached the noble island of the sun-god, where were the goodly cattle and sheep belonging to the sun Hyperion.
While still at sea in my ship I could bear the cattle lowing as they came home to the yards, and the sheep bleating.
Then I remembered what the blind Theban prophet Teiresias had told me, and how carefully Aeaean Circe had warned me to shun the island of the blessed sun-god.
So being much troubled I said to the men, ‘My men, I know you are hard pressed, but listen while I tell you the prophecy that Teiresias made me, and how carefully Aeaean Circe warned me to shun the island of the blessed sun-god, for it was here, she said, that our worst danger would lie.
Head the ship, therefore, away from the island.’ “The men were in despair at this, and Eurylochus at once gave me an insolent answer.
‘Ulysses,’ said he, ‘you are cruel; you are very strong yourself and never get worn out; you seem to be made of iron, and now, though your men are exhausted with toil and want of sleep, you will not let them land and cook themselves a good supper upon this island, but bid them put out to sea and go faring fruitlessly on through the watches of the flying night.
It is by night that the winds blow hardest and do so much damage; how can we escape should one of those sudden squalls spring up from South West or West, which so often wreck a vessel when our lords the gods are unpropitious?
Now, therefore, let us obey the behests of night and prepare our supper here hard by the ship; to-morrow morning we will go on board again and put out to sea.’ “Thus spoke Eurylochus, and the men approved his words.
I saw that heaven meant us a mischief and said, ‘You force me to yield, for you are many against one, but at any rate each one of you must take his solemn oath that if he meet with a herd of cattle or a large flock of sheep, he will not be so mad as to kill a single head of either, but will be satisfied with the food that Circe has given us.’ “They all swore as I bade them, and when they had completed their oath we made the ship fast in a harbour that was near a stream of fresh water, and the men went ashore and cooked their suppers.
As soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, they began talking about their poor comrades whom Scylla had snatched up and eaten; this set them weeping and they went on crying till they fell off into a sound sleep.
“In the third watch of the night when the stars had shifted their places, Jove raised a great gale of wind that flew a hurricane so that land and sea were covered with thick clouds, and night sprang forth out of the heavens.
When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, we brought the ship to land and drew her into a cave wherein the sea-nymphs hold their courts and dances, and I called the men together in council.
“‘My friends,’ said I, ‘we have meat and drink in the ship, let us mind, therefore, and not touch the cattle, or we shall suffer for it; for these cattle and sheep belong to the mighty sun, who sees and gives ear to everything.’ And again they promised that they would obey.
“For a whole month the wind blew steadily from the South, and there was no other wind, but only South and East.105 As long as corn and wine held out the men did not touch the cattle when they were hungry; when, however, they had eaten all there was in the ship, they were forced to go further afield, with hook and line, catching birds, and taking whatever they could lay their hands on; for they were starving.
One day, therefore, I went up inland that I might pray heaven to show me some means of getting away.
When I had gone far enough to be clear of all my men, and had found a place that was well sheltered from the wind, I washed my hands and prayed to all the gods in Olympus till by and by they sent me off into a sweet sleep.
“Meanwhile Eurylochus had been giving evil counsel to the men, ‘Listen to me,’ said he, ‘my poor comrades.
All deaths are bad enough but there is none so bad as famine.
Why should not we drive in the best of these cows and offer them in sacrifice to the immortal gods?
If we ever get back to Ithaca, we can build a fine temple to the sun-god and enrich it with every kind of ornament; if, however, he is determined to sink our ship out of revenge for these homed cattle, and the other gods are of the same mind, I for one would rather drink salt water once for all and have done with it, than be starved to death by inches in such a desert island as this is.’ “Thus spoke Eurylochus, and the men approved his words.
Now the cattle, so fair and goodly, were feeding not far from the ship; the men, therefore, drove in the best of them, and they all stood round them saying their prayers, and using young oak-shoots instead of barley-meal, for there was no barley left.
When they had done praying they killed the cows and dressed their carcasses; they cut out the thigh bones, wrapped them round in two layers of fat, and set some pieces of raw meat on top of them.
They had no wine with which to make drink-offerings over the sacrifice while it was cooking, so they kept pouring on a little water from time to time while the inward meats were being grilled; then, when the thigh bones were burned and they had tasted the inward meats, they cut the rest up small and put the pieces upon the spits.
“By this time my deep sleep had left me, and I turned back to the ship and to the sea shore.
As I drew near I began to smell hot roast meat, so I groaned out a prayer to the immortal gods.
‘Father Jove,’ I exclaimed, ‘and all you other gods who live in everlasting bliss, you have done me a cruel mischief by the sleep into which you have sent me; see what fine work these men of mine have been making in my absence.’ “Meanwhile Lampetie went straight off to the sun and told him we had been killing his cows, whereon he flew into a great rage, and said to the immortals, ‘Father Jove, and all you other gods who live in everlasting bliss, I must have vengeance on the crew of Ulysses’ ship: they have had the insolence to kill my cows, which were the one thing I loved to look upon, whether I was going up heaven or down again.
If they do not square accounts with me about my cows, I will go down to Hades and shine there among the dead.’ “‘Sun,’ said Jove, ‘go on shining upon us gods and upon mankind over the fruitful earth.
I will shiver their ship into little pieces with a bolt of white lightning as soon as they get out to sea.’ “I was told all this by Calypso, who said she had heard it from the mouth of Mercury.
“As soon as I got down to my ship and to the sea shore I rebuked each one of the men separately, but we could see no way out of it, for the cows were dead already.
And indeed the gods began at once to show signs and wonders among us, for the hides of the cattle crawled about, and the joints upon the spits began to low like cows, and the meat, whether cooked or raw, kept on making a noise just as cows do.
“For six days my men kept driving in the best cows and feasting upon them, but when Jove the son of Saturn had added a seventh day, the fury of the gale abated; we therefore went on board, raised our masts, spread sail, and put out to sea.
As soon as we were well away from the island, and could see nothing but sky and sea, the son of Saturn raised a black cloud over our ship, and the sea grew dark beneath it.
We did not get on much further, for in another moment we were caught by a terrific squall from the West that snapped the forestays of the mast so that it fell aft, while all the ship’s gear tumbled about at the bottom of the vessel.
The mast fell upon the head of the helmsman in the ship’s stern, so that the bones of his head were crushed to pieces, and he fell overboard as though he were diving, with no more life left in him.
“Then Jove let fly with his thunderbolts, and the ship went round and round, and was filled with fire and brimstone as the lightning struck it.
The men all fell into the sea; they were carried about in the water round the ship, looking like so many sea-gulls, but the god presently deprived them of all chance of getting home again.
“I stuck to the ship till the sea knocked her sides from her keel (which drifted about by itself) and struck the mast out of her in the direction of the keel; but there was a backstay of stout ox-thong still hanging about it, and with this I lashed the mast and keel together, and getting astride of them was carried wherever the winds chose to take me.
“[The gale from the West had now spent its force, and the wind got into the South again, which frightened me lest I should be taken back to the terrible whirlpool of Charybdis.
This indeed was what actually happened, for I was borne along by the waves all night, and by sunrise had reached the rock of Scylla, and the whirlpool.
She was then sucking down the salt sea water,106 but I was carried aloft toward the fig tree, which I caught hold of and clung on to like a bat.
I could not plant my feet anywhere so as to stand securely, for the roots were a long way off and the boughs that overshadowed the whole pool were too high, too vast, and too far apart for me to reach them; so I hung patiently on, waiting till the pool should discharge my mast and raft again—and a very long while it seemed.
A jury-man is not more glad to get home to supper, after having been long detained in court by troublesome cases, than I was to see my raft beginning to work its way out of the whirlpool again.
At last I let go with my hands and feet, and fell heavily into the sea, hard by my raft on to which I then got, and began to row with my hands.
As for Scylla, the father of gods and men would not let her get further sight of me—otherwise I should have certainly been lost.107 “Hence I was carried along for nine days till on the tenth night the gods stranded me on the Ogygian island, where dwells the great and powerful goddess Calypso.
She took me in and was kind to me, but I need say no more about this, for I told you and your noble wife all about it yesterday, and I hate saying the same thing over and over again.” BOOK XIII ULYSSES LEAVES SCHERIA AND RETURNS TO ITHACA.
Thus did he speak, and they all held their peace throughout the covered cloister, enthralled by the charm of his story, till presently Alcinous began to speak.
“Ulysses,” said he, “now that you have reached my house I doubt not you will get home without further misadventure no matter how much you have suffered in the past.
To you others, however, who come here night after night to drink my choicest wine and listen to my bard, I would insist as follows.
Our guest has already packed up the clothes, wrought gold,108 and other valuables which you have brought for his acceptance; let us now, therefore, present him further, each one of us, with a large tripod and a cauldron.
We will recoup ourselves by the levy of a general rate; for private individuals cannot be expected to bear the burden of such a handsome present.” Every one approved of this, and then they went home to bed each in his own abode.
When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared they hurried down to the ship and brought their cauldrons with them.
Alcinous went on board and saw everything so securely stowed under the ship’s benches that nothing could break adrift and injure the rowers.
Then they went to the house of Alcinous to get dinner, and he sacrificed a bull for them in honour of Jove who is the lord of all.
They set the steaks to grill and made an excellent dinner, after which the inspired bard, Demodocus, who was a favourite with every one, sang to them; but Ulysses kept on turning his eyes towards the sun, as though to hasten his setting, for he was longing to be on his way.
As one who has been all day ploughing a fallow field with a couple of oxen keeps thinking about his supper and is glad when night comes that he may go and get it, for it is all his legs can do to carry him, even so did Ulysses rejoice when the sun went down, and he at once said to the Phaeacians, addressing himself more particularly to King Alcinous: “Sir, and all of you, farewell.
Make your drink-offerings and send me on my way rejoicing, for you have fulfilled my heart’s desire by giving me an escort, and making me presents, which heaven grant that I may turn to good account; may I find my admirable wife living in peace among friends,109 and may you whom I leave behind me give satisfaction to your wives and children;110 may heaven vouchsafe you every good grace, and may no evil thing come among your people.” Thus did he speak.
His hearers all of them approved his saying and agreed that he should have his escort inasmuch as he had spoken reasonably.
Alcinous therefore said to his servant, “Pontonous, mix some wine and hand it round to everybody, that we may offer a prayer to father Jove, and speed our guest upon his way.” Pontonous mixed the wine and handed it to every one in turn; the others each from his own seat made a drink-offering to the blessed gods that live in heaven, but Ulysses rose and placed the double cup in the hands of queen Arete.
“Farewell, queen,” said he, “henceforward and for ever, till age and death, the common lot of mankind, lay their hands upon you.
I now take my leave; be happy in this house with your children, your people, and with king Alcinous.” As he spoke he crossed the threshold, and Alcinous sent a man to conduct him to his ship and to the sea shore.
Arete also sent some maidservants with him—one with a clean shirt and cloak, another to carry his strong box, and a third with corn and wine.
When they got to the water side the crew took these things and put them on board, with all the meat and drink; but for Ulysses they spread a rug and a linen sheet on deck that he might sleep soundly in the stern of the ship.
Then he too went on board and lay down without a word, but the crew took every man his place and loosed the hawser from the pierced stone to which it had been bound.
Thereon, when they began rowing out to sea, Ulysses fell into a deep, sweet, and almost deathlike slumber.111 The ship bounded forward on her way as a four in hand chariot flies over the course when the horses feel the whip.
Her prow curvetted as it were the neck of a stallion, and a great wave of dark blue water seethed in her wake.
She held steadily on her course, and even a falcon, swiftest of all birds, could not have kept pace with her.
Thus, then, she cut her way through the water, carrying one who was as cunning as the gods, but who was now sleeping peacefully, forgetful of all that he had suffered both on the field of battle and by the waves of the weary sea.
When the bright star that heralds the approach of dawn began to show, the ship drew near to land.112 Now there is in Ithaca a haven of the old merman Phorcys, which lies between two points that break the line of the sea and shut the harbour in.
These shelter it from the storms of wind and sea that rage outside, so that, when once within it, a ship may lie without being even moored.
At the head of this harbour there is a large olive tree, and at no great distance a fine overarching cavern sacred to the nymphs who are called Naiads.113 There are mixing bowls within it and wine-jars of stone, and the bees hive there.
Moreover, there are great looms of stone on which the nymphs weave their robes of sea purple—very curious to see—and at all times there is water within it.
It has two entrances, one facing North by which mortals can go down into the cave, while the other comes from the South and is more mysterious; mortals cannot possibly get in by it, it is the way taken by the gods.
Into this harbour, then, they took their ship, for they knew the place.114 She had so much way upon her that she ran half her own length on to the shore;115 when, however, they had landed, the first thing they did was to lift Ulysses with his rug and linen sheet out of the ship, and lay him down upon the sand still fast asleep.
Then they took out the presents which Minerva had persuaded the Phaeacians to give him when he was setting out on his voyage homewards.
They put these all together by the root of the olive tree, away from the road, for fear some passer by116 might come and steal them before Ulysses awoke; and then they made the best of their way home again.
But Neptune did not forget the threats with which he had already threatened Ulysses, so he took counsel with Jove.
“Father Jove,” said he, “I shall no longer be held in any sort of respect among you gods, if mortals like the Phaeacians, who are my own flesh and blood, show such small regard for me.
I said I would let Ulysses get home when he had suffered sufficiently.
I did not say that he should never get home at all, for I knew you had already nodded your head about it, and promised that he should do so; but now they have brought him in a ship fast asleep and have landed him in Ithaca after loading him with more magnificent presents of bronze, gold, and raiment than he would ever have brought back from Troy, if he had had his share of the spoil and got home without misadventure.” And Jove answered, “What, O Lord of the Earthquake, are you talking about?
The gods are by no means wanting in respect for you.
It would be monstrous were they to insult one so old and honoured as you are.
As regards mortals, however, if any of them is indulging in insolence and treating you disrespectfully, it will always rest with yourself to deal with him as you may think proper, so do just as you please.” “I should have done so at once,” replied Neptune, “if I were not anxious to avoid anything that might displease you; now, therefore, I should like to wreck the Phaeacian ship as it is returning from its escort.
This will stop them from escorting people in future; and I should also like to bury their city under a huge mountain.” “My good friend,” answered Jove, “I should recommend you at the very moment when the people from the city are watching the ship on her way, to turn it into a rock near the land and looking like a ship.
This will astonish everybody, and you can then bury their city under the mountain.” When earth-encircling Neptune heard this he went to Scheria where the Phaeacians live, and stayed there till the ship, which was making rapid way, had got close in.
Then he went up to it, turned it into stone, and drove it down with the flat of his hand so as to root it in the ground.
After this he went away.
The Phaeacians then began talking among themselves, and one would turn towards his neighbour, saying, “Bless my heart, who is it that can have rooted the ship in the sea just as she was getting into port?
We could see the whole of her only a moment ago.” This was how they talked, but they knew nothing about it; and Alcinous said, “I remember now the old prophecy of my father.
He said that Neptune would be angry with us for taking every one so safely over the sea, and would one day wreck a Phaeacian ship as it was returning from an escort, and bury our city under a high mountain.
This was what my old father used to say, and now it is all coming true.117 Now therefore let us all do as I say; in the first place we must leave off giving people escorts when they come here, and in the next let us sacrifice twelve picked bulls to Neptune that he may have mercy upon us, and not bury our city under the high mountain.” When the people heard this they were afraid and got ready the bulls.
Thus did the chiefs and rulers of the Phaeacians pray to king Neptune, standing round his altar; and at the same time118 Ulysses woke up once more upon his own soil.
He had been so long away that he did not know it again; moreover, Jove’s daughter Minerva had made it a foggy day, so that people might not know of his having come, and that she might tell him everything without either his wife or his fellow citizens and friends recognising him119 until he had taken his revenge upon the wicked suitors.
Everything, therefore, seemed quite different to him—the long straight tracks, the harbours, the precipices, and the goodly trees, appeared all changed as he started up and looked upon his native land.
So he smote his thighs with the flat of his hands and cried aloud despairingly.
“Alas,” he exclaimed, “among what manner of people am I fallen?
Are they savage and uncivilised or hospitable and humane?
Where shall I put all this treasure, and which way shall I go?
I wish I had staid over there with the Phaeacians; or I could have gone to some other great chief who would have been good to me and given me an escort.
As it is I do not know where to put my treasure, and I cannot leave it here for fear somebody else should get hold of it.
In good truth the chiefs and rulers of the Phaeacians have not been dealing fairly by me, and have left me in the wrong country; they said they would take me back to Ithaca and they have not done so: may Jove the protector of suppliants chastise them, for he watches over everybody and punishes those who do wrong.
Still, I suppose I must count my goods and see if the crew have gone off with any of them.” He counted his goodly coppers and cauldrons, his gold and all his clothes, but there was nothing missing; still he kept grieving about not being in his own country, and wandered up and down by the shore of the sounding sea bewailing his hard fate.
Then Minerva came up to him disguised as a young shepherd of delicate and princely mien, with a good cloak folded double about her shoulders; she had sandals on her comely feet and held a javelin in her hand.
Ulysses was glad when he saw her, and went straight up to her.
“My friend,” said he, “you are the first person whom I have met with in this country; I salute you, therefore, and beg you to be well disposed towards me.
Protect these my goods, and myself too, for I embrace your knees and pray to you as though you were a god.
Tell me, then, and tell me truly, what land and country is this?
Who are its inhabitants?
Am I on an island, or is this the sea board of some continent?” Minerva answered, “Stranger, you must be very simple, or must have come from somewhere a long way off, not to know what country this is.
It is a very celebrated place, and everybody knows it East and West.
It is rugged and not a good driving country, but it is by no means a bad island for what there is of it.
It grows any quantity of corn and also wine, for it is watered both by rain and dew; it breeds cattle also and goats; all kinds of timber grow here, and there are watering places where the water never runs dry; so, sir, the name of Ithaca is known even as far as Troy, which I understand to be a long way off from this Achaean country.” Ulysses was glad at finding himself, as Minerva told him, in his own country, and he began to answer, but he did not speak the truth, and made up a lying story in the instinctive wiliness of his heart.
“I heard of Ithaca,” said he, “when I was in Crete beyond the seas, and now it seems I have reached it with all these treasures.
I have left as much more behind me for my children, but am flying because I killed Orsilochus son of Idomeneus, the fleetest runner in Crete.
I killed him because he wanted to rob me of the spoils I had got from Troy with so much trouble and danger both on the field of battle and by the waves of the weary sea; he said I had not served his father loyally at Troy as vassal, but had set myself up as an independent ruler, so I lay in wait for him with one of my followers by the road side, and speared him as he was coming into town from the country.
It was a very dark night and nobody saw us; it was not known, therefore, that I had killed him, but as soon as I had done so I went to a ship and besought the owners, who were Phoenicians, to take me on board and set me in Pylos or in Elis where the Epeans rule, giving them as much spoil as satisfied them.
They meant no guile, but the wind drove them off their course, and we sailed on till we came hither by night.
It was all we could do to get inside the harbour, and none of us said a word about supper though we wanted it badly, but we all went on shore and lay down just as we were.
I was very tired and fell asleep directly, so they took my goods out of the ship, and placed them beside me where I was lying upon the sand.
Then they sailed away to Sidonia, and I was left here in great distress of mind.” Such was his story, but Minerva smiled and caressed him with her hand.
Then she took the form of a woman, fair, stately, and wise, “He must be indeed a shifty lying fellow,” said she, “who could surpass you in all manner of craft even though you had a god for your antagonist.
Dare devil that you are, full of guile, unwearying in deceit, can you not drop your tricks and your instinctive falsehood, even now that you are in your own country again?
We will say no more, however, about this, for we can both of us deceive upon occasion—you are the most accomplished counsellor and orator among all mankind, while I for diplomacy and subtlety have no equal among the gods.
Did you not know Jove’s daughter Minerva—me, who have been ever with you, who kept watch over you in all your troubles, and who made the Phaeacians take so great a liking to you?
And now, again, I am come here to talk things over with you, and help you to hide the treasure I made the Phaeacians give you; I want to tell you about the troubles that await you in your own house; you have got to face them, but tell no one, neither man nor woman, that you have come home again.
Bear everything, and put up with every man’s insolence, without a word.” And Ulysses answered, “A man, goddess, may know a great deal, but you are so constantly changing your appearance that when he meets you it is a hard matter for him to know whether it is you or not.
This much, however, I know exceedingly well; you were very kind to me as long as we Achaeans were fighting before Troy, but from the day on which we went on board ship after having sacked the city of Priam, and heaven dispersed us—from that day, Minerva, I saw no more of you, and cannot ever remember your coming to my ship to help me in a difficulty; I had to wander on sick and sorry till the gods delivered me from evil and I reached the city of the Phaeacians, where you encouraged me and took me into the town.120 And now, I beseech you in your father’s name, tell me the truth, for I do not believe I am really back in Ithaca.
I am in some other country and you are mocking me and deceiving me in all you have been saying.
Tell me then truly, have I really got back to my own country?” “You are always taking something of that sort in your head,” replied Minerva, “and that is why I cannot desert you in your afflictions; you are so plausible, shrewd and shifty.
Any one but yourself on returning from so long a voyage would at once have gone home to see his wife and children, but you do not seem to care about asking after them or hearing any news about them till you have exploited your wife, who remains at home vainly grieving for you, and having no peace night or day for the tears she sheds on your behalf.
As for my not coming near you, I was never uneasy about you, for I was certain you would get back safely though you would lose all your men, and I did not wish to quarrel with my uncle Neptune, who never forgave you for having blinded his son.121 I will now, however, point out to you the lie of the land, and you will then perhaps believe me.
This is the haven of the old merman Phorcys, and here is the olive tree that grows at the head of it; [near it is the cave sacred to the Naiads;122 here too is the overarching cavern in which you have offered many an acceptable hecatomb to the nymphs, and this is the wooded mountain Neritum.” As she spoke the goddess dispersed the mist and the land appeared.
Then Ulysses rejoiced at finding himself again in his own land, and kissed the bounteous soil; he lifted up his hands and prayed to the nymphs, saying, “Naiad nymphs, daughters of Jove, I made sure that I was never again to see you, now therefore I greet you with all loving salutations, and I will bring you offerings as in the old days, if Jove’s redoubtable daughter will grant me life, and bring my son to manhood.” “Take heart, and do not trouble yourself about that,” rejoined Minerva, “let us rather set about stowing your things at once in the cave, where they will be quite safe.
Let us see how we can best manage it all.” Therewith she went down into the cave to look for the safest hiding places, while Ulysses brought up all the treasure of gold, bronze, and good clothing which the Phaeacians had given him.
They stowed everything carefully away, and Minerva set a stone against the door of the cave.
Then the two sat down by the root of the great olive, and consulted how to compass the destruction of the wicked suitors.
“Ulysses,” said Minerva, “noble son of Laertes, think how you can lay hands on these disreputable people who have been lording it in your house these three years, courting your wife and making wedding presents to her, while she does nothing but lament your absence, giving hope and sending encouraging messages123 to every one of them, but meaning the very opposite of all she says.” And Ulysses answered, “In good truth, goddess, it seems I should have come to much the same bad end in my own house as Agamemnon did, if you had not given me such timely information.
Advise me how I shall best avenge myself.
Stand by my side and put your courage into my heart as on the day when we loosed Troy’s fair diadem from her brow.
Help me now as you did then, and I will fight three hundred men, if you, goddess, will be with me.” “Trust me for that,” said she, “I will not lose sight of you when once we set about it, and I imagine that some of those who are devouring your substance will then bespatter the pavement with their blood and brains.
I will begin by disguising you so that no human being shall know you; I will cover your body with wrinkles; you shall lose all your yellow hair; I will clothe you in a garment that shall fill all who see it with loathing; I will blear your fine eyes for you, and make you an unseemly object in the sight of the suitors, of your wife, and of the son whom you left behind you.
Then go at once to the swineherd who is in charge of your pigs; he has been always well affected towards you, and is devoted to Penelope and your son; you will find him feeding his pigs near the rock that is called Raven124 by the fountain Arethusa, where they are fattening on beechmast and spring water after their manner.
Stay with him and find out how things are going, while I proceed to Sparta and see your son, who is with Menelaus at Lacedaemon, where he has gone to try and find out whether you are still alive.”125 “But why,” said Ulysses, “did you not tell him, for you knew all about it?
Did you want him too to go sailing about amid all kinds of hardship while others are eating up his estate?” Minerva answered, “Never mind about him, I sent him that he might be well spoken of for having gone.
He is in no sort of difficulty, but is staying quite comfortably with Menelaus, and is surrounded with abundance of every kind.
The suitors have put out to sea and are lying in wait for him, for they mean to kill him before he can get home.
I do not much think they will succeed, but rather that some of those who are now eating up your estate will first find a grave themselves.” As she spoke Minerva touched him with her wand and covered him with wrinkles, took away all his yellow hair, and withered the flesh over his whole body; she bleared his eyes, which were naturally very fine ones; she changed his clothes and threw an old rag of a wrap about him, and a tunic, tattered, filthy, and begrimed with smoke; she also gave him an undressed deer skin as an outer garment, and furnished him with a staff and a wallet all in holes, with a twisted thong for him to sling it over his shoulder.
When the pair had thus laid their plans they parted, and the goddess went straight to Lacedaemon to fetch Telemachus.
BOOK XIV ULYSSES IN THE HUT WITH EUMAEUS.
Ulysses now left the haven, and took the rough track up through the wooded country and over the crest of the mountain till he reached the place where Minerva had said that he would find the swineherd, who was the most thrifty servant he had.
He found him sitting in front of his hut, which was by the yards that he had built on a site which could be seen from far.
He had made them spacious126 and fair to see, with a free run for the pigs all round them; he had built them during his master’s absence, of stones which he had gathered out of the ground, without saying anything to Penelope or Laertes, and he had fenced them on top with thorn bushes.
Outside the yard he had run a strong fence of oaken posts, split, and set pretty close together, while inside he had built twelve styes near one another for the sows to lie in.
There were fifty pigs wallowing in each stye, all of them breeding sows; but the boars slept outside and were much fewer in number, for the suitors kept on eating them, and the swineherd had to send them the best he had continually.
There were three hundred and sixty boar pigs, and the herdsman’s four hounds, which were as fierce as wolves, slept always with them.
The swineherd was at that moment cutting out a pair of sandals127 from a good stout ox hide.
Three of his men were out herding the pigs in one place or another, and he had sent the fourth to town with a boar that he had been forced to send the suitors that they might sacrifice it and have their fill of meat.
When the hounds saw Ulysses they set up a furious barking and flew at him, but Ulysses was cunning enough to sit down and loose his hold of the stick that he had in his hand: still, he would have been torn by them in his own homestead had not the swineherd dropped his ox hide, rushed full speed through the gate of the yard and driven the dogs off by shouting and throwing stones at them.
Then he said to Ulysses, “Old man, the dogs were likely to have made short work of you, and then you would have got me into trouble.
The gods have given me quite enough worries without that, for I have lost the best of masters, and am in continual grief on his account.
I have to attend swine for other people to eat, while he, if he yet lives to see the light of day, is starving in some distant land.
But come inside, and when you have had your fill of bread and wine, tell me where you come from, and all about your misfortunes.” On this the swineherd led the way into the hut and bade him sit down.
He strewed a good thick bed of rushes upon the floor, and on the top of this he threw the shaggy chamois skin—a great thick one—on which he used to sleep by night.
Ulysses was pleased at being made thus welcome, and said “May Jove, sir, and the rest of the gods grant you your heart’s desire in return for the kind way in which you have received me.” To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “Stranger, though a still poorer man should come here, it would not be right for me to insult him, for all strangers and beggars are from Jove.
You must take what you can get and be thankful, for servants live in fear when they have young lords for their masters; and this is my misfortune now, for heaven has hindered the return of him who would have been always good to me and given me something of my own—a house, a piece of land, a good looking wife, and all else that a liberal master allows a servant who has worked hard for him, and whose labour the gods have prospered as they have mine in the situation which I hold.
If my master had grown old here he would have done great things by me, but he is gone, and I wish that Helen’s whole race were utterly destroyed, for she has been the death of many a good man.
It was this matter that took my master to Ilius, the land of noble steeds, to fight the Trojans in the cause of king Agamemnon.” As he spoke he bound his girdle round him and went to the styes where the young sucking pigs were penned.
He picked out two which he brought back with him and sacrificed.
He singed them, cut them up, and spitted them; when the meat was cooked he brought it all in and set it before Ulysses, hot and still on the spit, whereon Ulysses sprinkled it over with white barley meal.
The swineherd then mixed wine in a bowl of ivy-wood, and taking a seat opposite Ulysses told him to begin.
“Fall to, stranger,” said he, “on a dish of servant’s pork.
The fat pigs have to go to the suitors, who eat them up without shame or scruple; but the blessed gods love not such shameful doings, and respect those who do what is lawful and right.
Even the fierce freebooters who go raiding on other people’s land, and Jove gives them their spoil—even they, when they have filled their ships and got home again live conscience-stricken, and look fearfully for judgement; but some god seems to have told these people that Ulysses is dead and gone; they will not, therefore, go back to their own homes and make their offers of marriage in the usual way, but waste his estate by force, without fear or stint.
Not a day or night comes out of heaven, but they sacrifice not one victim nor two only, and they take the run of his wine, for he was exceedingly rich.
No other great man either in Ithaca or on the mainland is as rich as he was; he had as much as twenty men put together.
I will tell you what he had.
There are twelve herds of cattle upon the main land, and as many flocks of sheep, there are also twelve droves of pigs, while his own men and hired strangers feed him twelve widely spreading herds of goats.
Here in Ithaca he runs even large flocks of goats on the far end of the island, and they are in the charge of excellent goat herds.
Each one of these sends the suitors the best goat in the flock every day.
As for myself, I am in charge of the pigs that you see here, and I have to keep picking out the best I have and sending it to them.” This was his story, but Ulysses went on eating and drinking ravenously without a word, brooding his revenge.
When he had eaten enough and was satisfied, the swineherd took the bowl from which he usually drank, filled it with wine, and gave it to Ulysses, who was pleased, and said as he took it in his hands, “My friend, who was this master of yours that bought you and paid for you, so rich and so powerful as you tell me?
You say he perished in the cause of King Agamemnon; tell me who he was, in case I may have met with such a person.
Jove and the other gods know, but I may be able to give you news of him, for I have travelled much.” Eumaeus answered, “Old man, no traveller who comes here with news will get Ulysses’ wife and son to believe his story.
Nevertheless, tramps in want of a lodging keep coming with their mouths full of lies, and not a word of truth; every one who finds his way to Ithaca goes to my mistress and tells her falsehoods, whereon she takes them in, makes much of them, and asks them all manner of questions, crying all the time as women will when they have lost their husbands.
And you too, old man, for a shirt and a cloak would doubtless make up a very pretty story.
But the wolves and birds of prey have long since torn Ulysses to pieces, or the fishes of the sea have eaten him, and his bones are lying buried deep in sand upon some foreign shore; he is dead and gone, and a bad business it is for all his friends—for me especially; go where I may I shall never find so good a master, not even if I were to go home to my mother and father where I was bred and born.
I do not so much care, however, about my parents now, though I should dearly like to see them again in my own country; it is the loss of Ulysses that grieves me most; I cannot speak of him without reverence though he is here no longer, for he was very fond of me, and took such care of me that wherever he may be I shall always honour his memory.” “My friend,” replied Ulysses, “you are very positive, and very hard of belief about your master’s coming home again, nevertheless I will not merely say, but will swear, that he is coming.
Do not give me anything for my news till he has actually come, you may then give me a shirt and cloak of good wear if you will.
I am in great want, but I will not take anything at all till then, for I hate a man, even as I hate hell fire, who lets his poverty tempt him into lying.
I swear by king Jove, by the rites of hospitality, and by that hearth of Ulysses to which I have now come, that all will surely happen as I have said it will.
Ulysses will return in this self same year; with the end of this moon and the beginning of the next he will be here to do vengeance on all those who are ill treating his wife and son.” To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “Old man, you will neither get paid for bringing good news, nor will Ulysses ever come home; drink your wine in peace, and let us talk about something else.
Do not keep on reminding me of all this; it always pains me when any one speaks about my honoured master.
As for your oath we will let it alone, but I only wish he may come, as do Penelope, his old father Laertes, and his son Telemachus.
I am terribly unhappy too about this same boy of his; he was running up fast into manhood, and bade fare to be no worse man, face and figure, than his father, but some one, either god or man, has been unsettling his mind, so he has gone off to Pylos to try and get news of his father, and the suitors are lying in wait for him as he is coming home, in the hope of leaving the house of Arceisius without a name in Ithaca.
But let us say no more about him, and leave him to be taken, or else to escape if the son of Saturn holds his hand over him to protect him.
And now, old man, tell me your own story; tell me also, for I want to know, who you are and where you come from.
Tell me of your town and parents, what manner of ship you came in, how crew brought you to Ithaca, and from what country they professed to come—for you cannot have come by land.” And Ulysses answered, “I will tell you all about it.
If there were meat and wine enough, and we could stay here in the hut with nothing to do but to eat and drink while the others go to their work, I could easily talk on for a whole twelve months without ever finishing the story of the sorrows with which it has pleased heaven to visit me.
“I am by birth a Cretan; my father was a well to do man, who had many sons born in marriage, whereas I was the son of a slave whom he had purchased for a concubine; nevertheless, my father Castor son of Hylax (whose lineage I claim, and who was held in the highest honour among the Cretans for his wealth, prosperity, and the valour of his sons) put me on the same level with my brothers who had been born in wedlock.
When, however, death took him to the house of Hades, his sons divided his estate and cast lots for their shares, but to me they gave a holding and little else; nevertheless, my valour enabled me to marry into a rich family, for I was not given to bragging, or shirking on the field of battle.
It is all over now; still, if you look at the straw you can see what the ear was, for I have had trouble enough and to spare.
Mars and Minerva made me doughty in war; when I had picked my men to surprise the enemy with an ambuscade I never gave death so much as a thought, but was the first to leap forward and spear all whom I could overtake.
Such was I in battle, but I did not care about farm work, nor the frugal home life of those who would bring up children.
My delight was in ships, fighting, javelins, and arrows—things that most men shudder to think of; but one man likes one thing and another another, and this was what I was most naturally inclined to.
Before the Achaeans went to Troy, nine times was I in command of men and ships on foreign service, and I amassed much wealth.
I had my pick of the spoil in the first instance, and much more was allotted to me later on.
“My house grew apace and I became a great man among the Cretans, but when Jove counselled that terrible expedition, in which so many perished, the people required me and Idomeneus to lead their ships to Troy, and there was no way out of it, for they insisted on our doing so.
There we fought for nine whole years, but in the tenth we sacked the city of Priam and sailed home again as heaven dispersed us.
Then it was that Jove devised evil against me.
I spent but one month happily with my children, wife, and property, and then I conceived the idea of making a descent on Egypt, so I fitted out a fine fleet and manned it.
I had nine ships, and the people flocked to fill them.
For six days I and my men made feast, and I found them many victims both for sacrifice to the gods and for themselves, but on the seventh day we went on board and set sail from Crete with a fair North wind behind us though we were going down a river.
Nothing went ill with any of our ships, and we had no sickness on board, but sat where we were and let the ships go as the wind and steersmen took them.
On the fifth day we reached the river Aegyptus; there I stationed my ships in the river, bidding my men stay by them and keep guard over them while I sent out scouts to reconnoitre from every point of vantage.
“But the men disobeyed my orders, took to their own devices, and ravaged the land of the Egyptians, killing the men, and taking their wives and children captive.
The alarm was soon carried to the city, and when they heard the war cry, the people came out at daybreak till the plain was filled with horsemen and foot soldiers and with the gleam of armour.
Then Jove spread panic among my men, and they would no longer face the enemy, for they found themselves surrounded.
The Egyptians killed many of us, and took the rest alive to do forced labour for them.
Jove, however, put it in my mind to do thus—and I wish I had died then and there in Egypt instead, for there was much sorrow in store for me—I took off my helmet and shield and dropped my spear from my hand; then I went straight up to the king’s chariot, clasped his knees and kissed them, whereon he spared my life, bade me get into his chariot, and took me weeping to his own home.
Many made at me with their ashen spears and tried to kill me in their fury, but the king protected me, for he feared the wrath of Jove the protector of strangers, who punishes those who do evil.
“I stayed there for seven years and got together much money among the Egyptians, for they all gave me something; but when it was now going on for eight years there came a certain Phoenician, a cunning rascal, who had already committed all sorts of villainy, and this man talked me over into going with him to Phoenicia, where his house and his possessions lay.
I stayed there for a whole twelve months, but at the end of that time when months and days had gone by till the same season had come round again, he set me on board a ship bound for Libya, on a pretence that I was to take a cargo along with him to that place, but really that he might sell me as a slave and take the money I fetched.
I suspected his intention, but went on board with him, for I could not help it.
“The ship ran before a fresh North wind till we had reached the sea that lies between Crete and Libya; there, however, Jove counselled their destruction, for as soon as we were well out from Crete and could see nothing but sea and sky, he raised a black cloud over our ship and the sea grew dark beneath it.
Then Jove let fly with his thunderbolts and the ship went round and round and was filled with fire and brimstone as the lightning struck it.
The men fell all into the sea; they were carried about in the water round the ship looking like so many sea-gulls, but the god presently deprived them of all chance of getting home again.
I was all dismayed.
Jove, however, sent the ship’s mast within my reach, which saved my life, for I clung to it, and drifted before the fury of the gale.
Nine days did I drift but in the darkness of the tenth night a great wave bore me on to the Thesprotian coast.
There Pheidon king of the Thesprotians entertained me hospitably without charging me anything at all—for his son found me when I was nearly dead with cold and fatigue, whereon he raised me by the hand, took me to his father’s house and gave me clothes to wear.
“There it was that I heard news of Ulysses, for the king told me he had entertained him, and shown him much hospitality while he was on his homeward journey.
He showed me also the treasure of gold, and wrought iron that Ulysses had got together.
There was enough to keep his family for ten generations, so much had he left in the house of king Pheidon.
But the king said Ulysses had gone to Dodona that he might learn Jove’s mind from the god’s high oak tree, and know whether after so long an absence he should return to Ithaca openly, or in secret.
Moreover the king swore in my presence, making drink-offerings in his own house as he did so, that the ship was by the water side, and the crew found, that should take him to his own country.
He sent me off however before Ulysses returned, for there happened to be a Thesprotian ship sailing for the wheat-growing island of Dulichium, and he told those in charge of her to be sure and take me safely to King Acastus.
“These men hatched a plot against me that would have reduced me to the very extreme of misery, for when the ship had got some way out from land they resolved on selling me as a slave.
They stripped me of the shirt and cloak that I was wearing, and gave me instead the tattered old clouts in which you now see me; then, towards nightfall, they reached the tilled lands of Ithaca, and there they bound me with a strong rope fast in the ship, while they went on shore to get supper by the sea side.
But the gods soon undid my bonds for me, and having drawn my rags over my head I slid down the rudder into the sea, where I struck out and swam till I was well clear of them, and came ashore near a thick wood in which I lay concealed.
They were very angry at my having escaped and went searching about for me, till at last they thought it was no further use and went back to their ship.
The gods, having hidden me thus easily, then took me to a good man’s door—for it seems that I am not to die yet awhile.” To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “Poor unhappy stranger, I have found the story of your misfortunes extremely interesting, but that part about Ulysses is not right; and you will never get me to believe it.
Why should a man like you go about telling lies in this way?
I know all about the return of my master.
The gods one and all of them detest him, or they would have taken him before Troy, or let him die with friends around him when the days of his fighting were done; for then the Achaeans would have built a mound over his ashes and his son would have been heir to his renown, but now the storm winds have spirited him away we know not whither.
“As for me I live out of the way here with the pigs, and never go to the town unless when Penelope sends for me on the arrival of some news about Ulysses.
Then they all sit round and ask questions, both those who grieve over the king’s absence, and those who rejoice at it because they can eat up his property without paying for it.
For my own part I have never cared about asking anyone else since the time when I was taken in by an Aetolian, who had killed a man and come a long way till at last he reached my station, and I was very kind to him.
He said he had seen Ulysses with Idomeneus among the Cretans, refitting his ships which had been damaged in a gale.
He said Ulysses would return in the following summer or autumn with his men, and that he would bring back much wealth.
And now you, you unfortunate old man, since fate has brought you to my door, do not try to flatter me in this way with vain hopes.
It is not for any such reason that I shall treat you kindly, but only out of respect for Jove the god of hospitality, as fearing him and pitying you.” Ulysses answered, “I see that you are of an unbelieving mind; I have given you my oath, and yet you will not credit me; let us then make a bargain, and call all the gods in heaven to witness it.
If your master comes home, give me a cloak and shirt of good wear, and send me to Dulichium where I want to go; but if he does not come as I say he will, set your men on to me, and tell them to throw me from yonder precipice, as a warning to tramps not to go about the country telling lies.” “And a pretty figure I should cut then,” replied Eumaeus, “both now and hereafter, if I were to kill you after receiving you into my hut and showing you hospitality.
I should have to say my prayers in good earnest if I did; but it is just supper time and I hope my men will come in directly, that we may cook something savoury for supper.” Thus did they converse, and presently the swineherds came up with the pigs, which were then shut up for the night in their styes, and a tremendous squealing they made as they were being driven into them.
But Eumaeus called to his men and said, “Bring in the best pig you have, that I may sacrifice him for this stranger, and we will take toll of him ourselves.
We have had trouble enough this long time feeding pigs, while others reap the fruit of our labour.” On this he began chopping firewood, while the others brought in a fine fat five year old boar pig, and set it at the altar.
Eumaeus did not forget the gods, for he was a man of good principles, so the first thing he did was to cut bristles from the pig’s face and throw them into the fire, praying to all the gods as he did so that Ulysses might return home again.
Then he clubbed the pig with a billet of oak which he had kept back when he was chopping the firewood, and stunned it, while the others slaughtered and singed it.
Then they cut it up, and Eumaeus began by putting raw pieces from each joint on to some of the fat; these he sprinkled with barley meal, and laid upon the embers; they cut the rest of the meat up small, put the pieces upon the spits and roasted them till they were done; when they had taken them off the spits they threw them on to the dresser in a heap.
The swineherd, who was a most equitable man, then stood up to give every one his share.
He made seven portions; one of these he set apart for Mercury the son of Maia and the nymphs, praying to them as he did so; the others he dealt out to the men man by man.
He gave Ulysses some slices cut lengthways down the loin as a mark of especial honour, and Ulysses was much pleased.
“I hope, Eumaeus,” said he, “that Jove will be as well disposed towards you as I am, for the respect you are showing to an outcast like myself.” To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “Eat, my good fellow, and enjoy your supper, such as it is.
God grants this, and withholds that, just as he thinks right, for he can do whatever he chooses.” As he spoke he cut off the first piece and offered it as a burnt sacrifice to the immortal gods; then he made them a drink-offering, put the cup in the hands of Ulysses, and sat down to his own portion.
Mesaulius brought them their bread; the swineherd had brought this man on his own account from among the Taphians during his master’s absence, and had paid for him with his own money without saying anything either to his mistress or Laertes.
They then laid their hands upon the good things that were before them, and when they had had enough to eat and drink, Mesaulius took away what was left of the bread, and they all went to bed after having made a hearty supper.
Now the night came on stormy and very dark, for there was no moon.
It poured without ceasing, and the wind blew strong from the West, which is a wet quarter, so Ulysses thought he would see whether Eumaeus, in the excellent care he took of him, would take off his own cloak and give it him, or make one of his men give him one.
“Listen to me,” said he, “Eumaeus and the rest of you; when I have said a prayer I will tell you something.
It is the wine that makes me talk in this way; wine will make even a wise man fall to singing; it will make him chuckle and dance and say many a word that he had better leave unspoken; still, as I have begun, I will go on.
Would that I were still young and strong as when we got up an ambuscade before Troy.
Menelaus and Ulysses were the leaders, but I was in command also, for the other two would have it so.
When we had come up to the wall of the city we crouched down beneath our armour and lay there under cover of the reeds and thick brushwood that grew about the swamp.
It came on to freeze with a North wind blowing; the snow fell small and fine like hoar frost, and our shields were coated thick with rime.
The others had all got cloaks and shirts, and slept comfortably enough with their shields about their shoulders, but I had carelessly left my cloak behind me, not thinking that I should be too cold, and had gone off in nothing but my shirt and shield.
When the night was two-thirds through and the stars had shifted their places, I nudged Ulysses who was close to me with my elbow, and he at once gave me his ear.
“‘Ulysses,’ said I, ‘this cold will be the death of me, for I have no cloak; some god fooled me into setting off with nothing on but my shirt, and I do not know what to do.’ “Ulysses, who was as crafty as he was valiant, hit upon the following plan: “‘Keep still,’ said he in a low voice, ‘or the others will hear you.’ Then he raised his head on his elbow.
“‘My friends,’ said he, ‘I have had a dream from heaven in my sleep.
We are a long way from the ships; I wish some one would go down and tell Agamemnon to send us up more men at once.’ “On this Thoas son of Andraemon threw off his cloak and set out running to the ships, whereon I took the cloak and lay in it comfortably enough till morning.
Would that I were still young and strong as I was in those days, for then some one of you swineherds would give me a cloak both out of good will and for the respect due to a brave soldier; but now people look down upon me because my clothes are shabby.” And Eumaeus answered, “Old man, you have told us an excellent story, and have said nothing so far but what is quite satisfactory; for the present, therefore, you shall want neither clothing nor anything else that a stranger in distress may reasonably expect, but to-morrow morning you have to shake your own old rags about your body again, for we have not many spare cloaks nor shirts up here, but every man has only one.
When Ulysses’ son comes home again he will give you both cloak and shirt, and send you wherever you may want to go.” With this he got up and made a bed for Ulysses by throwing some goatskins and sheepskins on the ground in front of the fire.
Here Ulysses lay down, and Eumaeus covered him over with a great heavy cloak that he kept for a change in case of extraordinarily bad weather.
Thus did Ulysses sleep, and the young men slept beside him.
But the swineherd did not like sleeping away from his pigs, so he got ready to go outside, and Ulysses was glad to see that he looked after his property during his master’s absence.
First he slung his sword over his brawny shoulders and put on a thick cloak to keep out the wind.
He also took the skin of a large and well fed goat, and a javelin in case of attack from men or dogs.
Thus equipped he went to his rest where the pigs were camping under an overhanging rock that gave them shelter from the North wind.
BOOK XV MINERVA SUMMONS TELEMACHUS FROM LACEDAEMON—HE MEETS WITH THEOCLYMENUS AT PYLOS AND BRINGS HIM TO ITHACA—ON LANDING HE GOES TO THE HUT OF EUMAEUS.
But Minerva went to the fair city of Lacedaemon to tell Ulysses’ son that he was to return at once.
She found him and Pisistratus sleeping in the forecourt of Menelaus’s house; Pisistratus was fast asleep, but Telemachus could get no rest all night for thinking of his unhappy father, so Minerva went close up to him and said: “Telemachus, you should not remain so far away from home any longer, nor leave your property with such dangerous people in your house; they will eat up everything you have among them, and you will have been on a fool’s errand.
Ask Menelaus to send you home at once if you wish to find your excellent mother still there when you get back.
Her father and brothers are already urging her to marry Eurymachus, who has given her more than any of the others, and has been greatly increasing his wedding presents.
I hope nothing valuable may have been taken from the house in spite of you, but you know what women are—they always want to do the best they can for the man who marries them, and never give another thought to the children of their first husband, nor to their father either when he is dead and done with.
Go home, therefore, and put everything in charge of the most respectable woman servant that you have, until it shall please heaven to send you a wife of your own.
Let me tell you also of another matter which you had better attend to.
The chief men among the suitors are lying in wait for you in the Strait128 between Ithaca and Samos, and they mean to kill you before you can reach home.
I do not much think they will succeed; it is more likely that some of those who are now eating up your property will find a grave themselves.
Sail night and day, and keep your ship well away from the islands; the god who watches over you and protects you will send you a fair wind.
As soon as you get to Ithaca send your ship and men on to the town, but yourself go straight to the swineherd who has charge of your pigs; he is well disposed towards you, stay with him, therefore, for the night, and then send him to Penelope to tell her that you have got back safe from Pylos.” Then she went back to Olympus; but Telemachus stirred Pisistratus with his heel to rouse him, and said, “Wake up Pisistratus, and yoke the horses to the chariot, for we must set off home.”129 But Pisistratus said, “No matter what hurry we are in we cannot drive in the dark.
It will be morning soon; wait till Menelaus has brought his presents and put them in the chariot for us; and let him say good bye to us in the usual way.
So long as he lives a guest should never forget a host who has shown him kindness.” As he spoke day began to break, and Menelaus, who had already risen, leaving Helen in bed, came towards them.
When Telemachus saw him he put on his shirt as fast as he could, threw a great cloak over his shoulders, and went out to meet him.
“Menelaus,” said he, “let me go back now to my own country, for I want to get home.” And Menelaus answered, “Telemachus, if you insist on going I will not detain you.
I do not like to see a host either too fond of his guest or too rude to him.
Moderation is best in all things, and not letting a man go when he wants to do so is as bad as telling him to go if he would like to stay.
One should treat a guest well as long as he is in the house and speed him when he wants to leave it.
Wait, then, till I can get your beautiful presents into your chariot, and till you have yourself seen them.
I will tell the women to prepare a sufficient dinner for you of what there may be in the house; it will be at once more proper and cheaper for you to get your dinner before setting out on such a long journey.
If, moreover, you have a fancy for making a tour in Hellas or in the Peloponnese, I will yoke my horses, and will conduct you myself through all our principal cities.
No one will send us away empty handed; every one will give us something—a bronze tripod, a couple of mules, or a gold cup.” “Menelaus,” replied Telemachus, “I want to go home at once, for when I came away I left my property without protection, and fear that while looking for my father I shall come to ruin myself, or find that something valuable has been stolen during my absence.” When Menelaus heard this he immediately told his wife and servants to prepare a sufficient dinner from what there might be in the house.
At this moment Eteoneus joined him, for he lived close by and had just got up; so Menelaus told him to light the fire and cook some meat, which he at once did.
Then Menelaus went down into his fragrant store room,130 not alone, but Helen went too, with Megapenthes.
When he reached the place where the treasures of his house were kept, he selected a double cup, and told his son Megapenthes to bring also a silver mixing bowl.
Meanwhile Helen went to the chest where she kept the lovely dresses which she had made with her own hands, and took out one that was largest and most beautifully enriched with embroidery; it glittered like a star, and lay at the very bottom of the chest.
131 Then they all came back through the house again till they got to Telemachus, and Menelaus said, “Telemachus, may Jove, the mighty husband of Juno, bring you safely home according to your desire.
I will now present you with the finest and most precious piece of plate in all my house.
It is a mixing bowl of pure silver, except the rim, which is inlaid with gold, and it is the work of Vulcan.
Phaedimus king of the Sidonians made me a present of it in the course of a visit that I paid him while I was on my return home.
I should like to give it to you.” With these words he placed the double cup in the hands of Telemachus, while Megapenthes brought the beautiful mixing bowl and set it before him.
Hard by stood lovely Helen with the robe ready in her hand.
“I too, my son,” said she, “have something for you as a keepsake from the hand of Helen; it is for your bride to wear upon her wedding day.
Till then, get your dear mother to keep it for you; thus may you go back rejoicing to your own country and to your home.” So saying she gave the robe over to him and he received it gladly.
Then Pisistratus put the presents into the chariot, and admired them all as he did so.
Presently Menelaus took Telemachus and Pisistratus into the house, and they both of them sat down to table.
A maid servant brought them water in a beautiful golden ewer, and poured it into a silver basin for them to wash their hands, and she drew a clean table beside them; an upper servant brought them bread and offered them many good things of what there was in the house.
Eteoneus carved the meat and gave them each their portions, while Megapenthes poured out the wine.
Then they laid their hands upon the good things that were before them, but as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink Telemachus and Pisistratus yoked the horses, and took their places in the chariot.
They drove out through the inner gateway and under the echoing gatehouse of the outer court, and Menelaus came after them with a golden goblet of wine in his right hand that they might make a drink-offering before they set out.
He stood in front of the horses and pledged them, saying, “Farewell to both of you; see that you tell Nestor how I have treated you, for he was as kind to me as any father could be while we Achaeans were fighting before Troy.” “We will be sure, sir,” answered Telemachus, “to tell him everything as soon as we see him.
I wish I were as certain of finding Ulysses returned when I get back to Ithaca, that I might tell him of the very great kindness you have shown me and of the many beautiful presents I am taking with me.” As he was thus speaking a bird flew on his right hand—an eagle with a great white goose in its talons which it had carried off from the farm yard—and all the men and women were running after it and shouting.
It came quite close up to them and flew away on their right hands in front of the horses.
When they saw it they were glad, and their hearts took comfort within them, whereon Pisistratus said, “Tell me, Menelaus, has heaven sent this omen for us or for you?” Menelaus was thinking what would be the most proper answer for him to make, but Helen was too quick for him and said, “I will read this matter as heaven has put it in my heart, and as I doubt not that it will come to pass.
The eagle came from the mountain where it was bred and has its nest, and in like manner Ulysses, after having travelled far and suffered much, will return to take his revenge—if indeed he is not back already and hatching mischief for the suitors.” “May Jove so grant it,” replied Telemachus, “if it should prove to be so, I will make vows to you as though you were a god, even when I am at home.” As he spoke he lashed his horses and they started off at full speed through the town towards the open country.
They swayed the yoke upon their necks and travelled the whole day long till the sun set and darkness was over all the land.
Then they reached Pherae, where Diocles lived who was son of Ortilochus, the son of Alpheus.
There they passed the night and were treated hospitably.
When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, they again yoked their horses and their places in the chariot.
They drove out through the inner gateway and under the echoing gatehouse of the outer court.
Then Pisistratus lashed his horses on and they flew forward nothing loath; ere long they came to Pylos, and then Telemachus said: “Pisistratus, I hope you will promise to do what I am going to ask you.
You know our fathers were old friends before us; moreover, we are both of an age, and this journey has brought us together still more closely; do not, therefore, take me past my ship, but leave me there, for if I go to your father’s house he will try to keep me in the warmth of his good will towards me, and I must go home at once.” Pisistratus thought how he should do as he was asked, and in the end he deemed it best to turn his horses towards the ship, and put Menelaus’s beautiful presents of gold and raiment in the stern of the vessel.
Then he said, “Go on board at once and tell your men to do so also before I can reach home to tell my father.
I know how obstinate he is, and am sure he will not let you go; he will come down here to fetch you, and he will not go back without you.
But he will be very angry.” With this he drove his goodly steeds back to the city of the Pylians and soon reached his home, but Telemachus called the men together and gave his orders.
“Now, my men,” said he, “get everything in order on board the ship, and let us set out home.” Thus did he speak, and they went on board even as he had said.
But as Telemachus was thus busied, praying also and sacrificing to Minerva in the ship’s stern, there came to him a man from a distant country, a seer, who was flying from Argos because he had killed a man.
He was descended from Melampus, who used to live in Pylos, the land of sheep; he was rich and owned a great house, but he was driven into exile by the great and powerful king Neleus.
Neleus seized his goods and held them for a whole year, during which he was a close prisoner in the house of king Phylacus, and in much distress of mind both on account of the daughter of Neleus and because he was haunted by a great sorrow that dread Erinys had laid upon him.
In the end, however, he escaped with his life, drove the cattle from Phylace to Pylos, avenged the wrong that had been done him, and gave the daughter of Neleus to his brother.
Then he left the country and went to Argos, where it was ordained that he should reign over much people.
There he married, established himself, and had two famous sons Antiphates and Mantius.
Antiphates became father of Oicleus, and Oicleus of Amphiaraus, who was dearly loved both by Jove and by Apollo, but he did not live to old age, for he was killed in Thebes by reason of a woman’s gifts.
His sons were Alcmaeon and Amphilochus.
Mantius, the other son of Melampus, was father to Polypheides and Cleitus.
Aurora, throned in gold, carried off Cleitus for his beauty’s sake, that he might dwell among the immortals, but Apollo made Polypheides the greatest seer in the whole world now that Amphiaraus was dead.
He quarrelled with his father and went to live in Hyperesia, where he remained and prophesied for all men.
His son, Theoclymenus, it was who now came up to Telemachus as he was making drink-offerings and praying in his ship.
“Friend,” said he, “now that I find you sacrificing in this place, I beseech you by your sacrifices themselves, and by the god to whom you make them, I pray you also by your own head and by those of your followers tell me the truth and nothing but the truth.
Who and whence are you?
Tell me also of your town and parents.” Telemachus said, “I will answer you quite truly.
I am from Ithaca, and my father is Ulysses, as surely as that he ever lived.
But he has come to some miserable end.
Therefore I have taken this ship and got my crew together to see if I can hear any news of him, for he has been away a long time.” “I too,” answered Theoclymenus, “am an exile, for I have killed a man of my own race.
He has many brothers and kinsmen in Argos, and they have great power among the Argives.
I am flying to escape death at their hands, and am thus doomed to be a wanderer on the face of the earth.
I am your suppliant; take me, therefore, on board your ship that they may not kill me, for I know they are in pursuit.” “I will not refuse you,” replied Telemachus, “if you wish to join us.
Come, therefore, and in Ithaca we will treat you hospitably according to what we have.” On this he received Theoclymenus’ spear and laid it down on the deck of the ship.
He went on board and sat in the stern, bidding Theoclymenus sit beside him; then the men let go the hawsers.
Telemachus told them to catch hold of the ropes, and they made all haste to do so.
They set the mast in its socket in the cross plank, raised it and made it fast with the forestays, and they hoisted their white sails with sheets of twisted ox hide.
Minerva sent them a fair wind that blew fresh and strong to take the ship on her course as fast as possible.
Thus then they passed by Crouni and Chalcis.
Presently the sun set and darkness was over all the land.
The vessel made a quick passage to Pheae and thence on to Elis, where the Epeans rule.
Telemachus then headed her for the flying islands,132 wondering within himself whether he should escape death or should be taken prisoner.
Meanwhile Ulysses and the swineherd were eating their supper in the hut, and the men supped with them.
As soon as they had had to eat and drink, Ulysses began trying to prove the swineherd and see whether he would continue to treat him kindly, and ask him to stay on at the station or pack him off to the city; so he said: “Eumaeus, and all of you, to-morrow I want to go away and begin begging about the town, so as to be no more trouble to you or to your men.
Give me your advice therefore, and let me have a good guide to go with me and show me the way.
I will go the round of the city begging as I needs must, to see if any one will give me a drink and a piece of bread.
I should like also to go to the house of Ulysses and bring news of her husband to Queen Penelope.
I could then go about among the suitors and see if out of all their abundance they will give me a dinner.
I should soon make them an excellent servant in all sorts of ways.
Listen and believe when I tell you that by the blessing of Mercury who gives grace and good name to the works of all men, there is no one living who would make a more handy servant than I should—to put fresh wood on the fire, chop fuel, carve, cook, pour out wine, and do all those services that poor men have to do for their betters.” The swineherd was very much disturbed when he heard this.
“Heaven help me,” he exclaimed, “what ever can have put such a notion as that into your head?
If you go near the suitors you will be undone to a certainty, for their pride and insolence reach the very heavens.
They would never think of taking a man like you for a servant.
Their servants are all young men, well dressed, wearing good cloaks and shirts, with well looking faces and their hair always tidy, the tables are kept quite clean and are loaded with bread, meat, and wine.
Stay where you are, then; you are not in anybody’s way; I do not mind your being here, no more do any of the others, and when Telemachus comes home he will give you a shirt and cloak and will send you wherever you want to go.” Ulysses answered, “I hope you may be as dear to the gods as you are to me, for having saved me from going about and getting into trouble; there is nothing worse than being always on the tramp; still, when men have once got low down in the world they will go through a great deal on behalf of their miserable bellies.
Since, however, you press me to stay here and await the return of Telemachus, tell me about Ulysses’ mother, and his father whom he left on the threshold of old age when he set out for Troy.
Are they still living or are they already dead and in the house of Hades?” “I will tell you all about them,” replied Eumaeus, “Laertes is still living and prays heaven to let him depart peacefully in his own house, for he is terribly distressed about the absence of his son, and also about the death of his wife, which grieved him greatly and aged him more than anything else did.
She came to an unhappy end133 through sorrow for her son: may no friend or neighbour who has dealt kindly by me come to such an end as she did.
As long as she was still living, though she was always grieving, I used to like seeing her and asking her how she did, for she brought me up along with her daughter Ctimene, the youngest of her children; we were boy and girl together, and she made little difference between us.
When, however, we both grew up, they sent Ctimene to Same and received a splendid dowry for her.
As for me, my mistress gave me a good shirt and cloak with a pair of sandals for my feet, and sent me off into the country, but she was just as fond of me as ever.
This is all over now.
Still it has pleased heaven to prosper my work in the situation which I now hold.
I have enough to eat and drink, and can find something for any respectable stranger who comes here; but there is no getting a kind word or deed out of my mistress, for the house has fallen into the hands of wicked people.
Servants want sometimes to see their mistress and have a talk with her; they like to have something to eat and drink at the house, and something too to take back with them into the country.
This is what will keep servants in a good humour.” Ulysses answered, “Then you must have been a very little fellow, Eumaeus, when you were taken so far away from your home and parents.
Tell me, and tell me true, was the city in which your father and mother lived sacked and pillaged, or did some enemies carry you off when you were alone tending sheep or cattle, ship you off here, and sell you for whatever your master gave them?” “Stranger,” replied Eumaeus, “as regards your question: sit still, make yourself comfortable, drink your wine, and listen to me.
The nights are now at their longest; there is plenty of time both for sleeping and sitting up talking together; you ought not to go to bed till bed time, too much sleep is as bad as too little; if any one of the others wishes to go to bed let him leave us and do so; he can then take my master’s pigs out when he has done breakfast in the morning.
We too will sit here eating and drinking in the hut, and telling one another stories about our misfortunes; for when a man has suffered much, and been buffeted about in the world, he takes pleasure in recalling the memory of sorrows that have long gone by.
As regards your question, then, my tale is as follows: “You may have heard of an island called Syra that lies over above Ortygia,134 where the land begins to turn round and look in another direction.135 It is not very thickly peopled, but the soil is good, with much pasture fit for cattle and sheep, and it abounds with wine and wheat.
Dearth never comes there, nor are the people plagued by any sickness, but when they grow old Apollo comes with Diana and kills them with his painless shafts.
It contains two communities, and the whole country is divided between these two.
My father Ctesius son of Ormenus, a man comparable to the gods, reigned over both.
“Now to this place there came some cunning traders from Phoenicia (for the Phoenicians are great mariners) in a ship which they had freighted with gewgaws of all kinds.
There happened to be a Phoenician woman in my father’s house, very tall and comely, and an excellent servant; these scoundrels got hold of her one day when she was washing near their ship, seduced her, and cajoled her in ways that no woman can resist, no matter how good she may be by nature.
The man who had seduced her asked her who she was and where she came from, and on this she told him her father’s name.
‘I come from Sidon,’ said she, ‘and am daughter to Arybas, a man rolling in wealth.
One day as I was coming into the town from the country, some Taphian pirates seized me and took me here over the sea, where they sold me to the man who owns this house, and he gave them their price for me.’ “The man who had seduced her then said, ‘Would you like to come along with us to see the house of your parents and your parents themselves?
They are both alive and are said to be well off.’ “‘I will do so gladly,’ answered she, ‘if you men will first swear me a solemn oath that you will do me no harm by the way.’ “They all swore as she told them, and when they had completed their oath the woman said, ‘Hush; and if any of your men meets me in the street or at the well, do not let him speak to me, for fear some one should go and tell my master, in which case he would suspect something.
He would put me in prison, and would have all of you murdered; keep your own counsel therefore; buy your merchandise as fast as you can, and send me word when you have done loading.
I will bring as much gold as I can lay my hands on, and there is something else also that I can do towards paying my fare.
I am nurse to the son of the good man of the house, a funny little fellow just able to run about.
I will carry him off in your ship, and you will get a great deal of money for him if you take him and sell him in foreign parts.’ “On this she went back to the house.
The Phoenicians stayed a whole year till they had loaded their ship with much precious merchandise, and then, when they had got freight enough, they sent to tell the woman.
Their messenger, a very cunning fellow, came to my father’s house bringing a necklace of gold with amber beads strung among it; and while my mother and the servants had it in their hands admiring it and bargaining about it, he made a sign quietly to the woman and then went back to the ship, whereon she took me by the hand and led me out of the house.
In the fore part of the house she saw the tables set with the cups of guests who had been feasting with my father, as being in attendance on him; these were now all gone to a meeting of the public assembly, so she snatched up three cups and carried them off in the bosom of her dress, while I followed her, for I knew no better.
The sun was now set, and darkness was over all the land, so we hurried on as fast as we could till we reached the harbour, where the Phoenician ship was lying.
When they had got on board they sailed their ways over the sea, taking us with them, and Jove sent then a fair wind; six days did we sail both night and day, but on the seventh day Diana struck the woman and she fell heavily down into the ship’s hold as though she were a sea gull alighting on the water; so they threw her overboard to the seals and fishes, and I was left all sorrowful and alone.
Presently the winds and waves took the ship to Ithaca, where Laertes gave sundry of his chattels for me, and thus it was that ever I came to set eyes upon this country.” Ulysses answered, “Eumaeus, I have heard the story of your misfortunes with the most lively interest and pity, but Jove has given you good as well as evil, for in spite of everything you have a good master, who sees that you always have enough to eat and drink; and you lead a good life, whereas I am still going about begging my way from city to city.” Thus did they converse, and they had only a very little time left for sleep, for it was soon daybreak.
In the mean time Telemachus and his crew were nearing land, so they loosed the sails, took down the mast, and rowed the ship into the harbour.136 They cast out their mooring stones and made fast the hawsers; they then got out upon the sea shore, mixed their wine, and got dinner ready.
As soon as they had had enough to eat and drink Telemachus said, “Take the ship on to the town, but leave me here, for I want to look after the herdsmen on one of my farms.
In the evening, when I have seen all I want, I will come down to the city, and to-morrow morning in return for your trouble I will give you all a good dinner with meat and wine.” 137 Then Theoclymenus said, “And what, my dear young friend, is to become of me?
To whose house, among all your chief men, am I to repair?
or shall I go straight to your own house and to your mother?” “At any other time,” replied Telemachus, “I should have bidden you go to my own house, for you would find no want of hospitality; at the present moment, however, you would not be comfortable there, for I shall be away, and my mother will not see you; she does not often show herself even to the suitors, but sits at her loom weaving in an upper chamber, out of their way; but I can tell you a man whose house you can go to—I mean Eurymachus the son of Polybus, who is held in the highest estimation by every one in Ithaca.
He is much the best man and the most persistent wooer, of all those who are paying court to my mother and trying to take Ulysses’ place.
Jove, however, in heaven alone knows whether or no they will come to a bad end before the marriage takes place.” As he was speaking a bird flew by upon his right hand—a hawk, Apollo’s messenger.
It held a dove in its talons, and the feathers, as it tore them off,138 fell to the ground midway between Telemachus and the ship.
On this Theoclymenus called him apart and caught him by the hand.
“Telemachus,” said he, “that bird did not fly on your right hand without having been sent there by some god.
As soon as I saw it I knew it was an omen; it means that you will remain powerful and that there will be no house in Ithaca more royal than your own.” “I wish it may prove so,” answered Telemachus.
“If it does, I will show you so much good will and give you so many presents that all who meet you will congratulate you.” Then he said to his friend Piraeus, “Piraeus, son of Clytius, you have throughout shown yourself the most willing to serve me of all those who have accompanied me to Pylos; I wish you would take this stranger to your own house and entertain him hospitably till I can come for him.” And Piraeus answered, “Telemachus, you may stay away as long as you please, but I will look after him for you, and he shall find no lack of hospitality.” As he spoke he went on board, and bade the others do so also and loose the hawsers, so they took their places in the ship.
But Telemachus bound on his sandals, and took a long and doughty spear with a head of sharpened bronze from the deck of the ship.
Then they loosed the hawsers, thrust the ship off from land, and made on towards the city as they had been told to do, while Telemachus strode on as fast as he could, till he reached the homestead where his countless herds of swine were feeding, and where dwelt the excellent swineherd, who was so devoted a servant to his master.
BOOK XVI ULYSSES REVEALS HIMSELF TO TELEMACHUS.
Meanwhile Ulysses and the swineherd had lit a fire in the hut and were were getting breakfast ready at daybreak, for they had sent the men out with the pigs.
When Telemachus came up, the dogs did not bark but fawned upon him, so Ulysses, hearing the sound of feet and noticing that the dogs did not bark, said to Eumaeus: “Eumaeus, I hear footsteps; I suppose one of your men or some one of your acquaintance is coming here, for the dogs are fawning upon him and not barking.” The words were hardly out of his mouth before his son stood at the door.
Eumaeus sprang to his feet, and the bowls in which he was mixing wine fell from his hands, as he made towards his master.
He kissed his head and both his beautiful eyes, and wept for joy.
A father could not be more delighted at the return of an only son, the child of his old age, after ten years’ absence in a foreign country and after having gone through much hardship.
He embraced him, kissed him all over as though he had come back from the dead, and spoke fondly to him saying: “So you are come, Telemachus, light of my eyes that you are.
When I heard you had gone to Pylos I made sure I was never going to see you any more.
Come in, my dear child, and sit down, that I may have a good look at you now you are home again; it is not very often you come into the country to see us herdsmen; you stick pretty close to the town generally.
I suppose you think it better to keep an eye on what the suitors are doing.” “So be it, old friend,” answered Telemachus, “but I am come now because I want to see you, and to learn whether my mother is still at her old home or whether some one else has married her, so that the bed of Ulysses is without bedding and covered with cobwebs.” “She is still at the house,” replied Eumaeus, “grieving and breaking her heart, and doing nothing but weep, both night and day continually.” As he spoke he took Telemachus’ spear, whereon he crossed the stone threshold and came inside.
Ulysses rose from his seat to give him place as he entered, but Telemachus checked him; “Sit down, stranger,” said he, “I can easily find another seat, and there is one here who will lay it for me.” Ulysses went back to his own place, and Eumaeus strewed some green brushwood on the floor and threw a sheepskin on top of it for Telemachus to sit upon.
Then the swineherd brought them platters of cold meat, the remains from what they had eaten the day before, and he filled the bread baskets with bread as fast as he could.
He mixed wine also in bowls of ivy-wood, and took his seat facing Ulysses.
Then they laid their hands on the good things that were before them, and as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink Telemachus said to Eumaeus, “Old friend, where does this stranger come from?
How did his crew bring him to Ithaca, and who were they?—for assuredly he did not come here by land.” To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “My son, I will tell you the real truth.
He says he is a Cretan, and that he has been a great traveller.
At this moment he is running away from a Thesprotian ship, and has taken refuge at my station, so I will put him into your hands.
Do whatever you like with him, only remember that he is your suppliant.” “I am very much distressed,” said Telemachus, “by what you have just told me.
How can I take this stranger into my house?
I am as yet young, and am not strong enough to hold my own if any man attacks me.
My mother cannot make up her mind whether to stay where she is and look after the house out of respect for public opinion and the memory of her husband, or whether the time is now come for her to take the best man of those who are wooing her, and the one who will make her the most advantageous offer; still, as the stranger has come to your station I will find him a cloak and shirt of good wear, with a sword and sandals, and will send him wherever he wants to go.
Or if you like you can keep him here at the station, and I will send him clothes and food that he may be no burden on you and on your men; but I will not have him go near the suitors, for they are very insolent, and are sure to ill treat him in a way that would greatly grieve me; no matter how valiant a man may be he can do nothing against numbers, for they will be too strong for him.” Then Ulysses said, “Sir, it is right that I should say something myself.
I am much shocked about what you have said about the insolent way in which the suitors are behaving in despite of such a man as you are.
Tell me, do you submit to such treatment tamely, or has some god set your people against you?
May you not complain of your brothers—for it is to these that a man may look for support, however great his quarrel may be?
I wish I were as young as you are and in my present mind; if I were son to Ulysses, or, indeed, Ulysses himself, I would rather some one came and cut my head off, but I would go to the house and be the bane of every one of these men.139 If they were too many for me—I being single-handed—I would rather die fighting in my own house than see such disgraceful sights day after day, strangers grossly maltreated, and men dragging the women servants about the house in an unseemly way, wine drawn recklessly, and bread wasted all to no purpose for an end that shall never be accomplished.” And Telemachus answered, “I will tell you truly everything.
There is no enmity between me and my people, nor can I complain of brothers, to whom a man may look for support however great his quarrel may be.
Jove has made us a race of only sons.
Laertes was the only son of Arceisius, and Ulysses only son of Laertes.
I am myself the only son of Ulysses who left me behind him when he went away, so that I have never been of any use to him.
Hence it comes that my house is in the hands of numberless marauders; for the chiefs from all the neighbouring islands, Dulichium, Same, Zacynthus, as also all the principal men of Ithaca itself, are eating up my house under the pretext of paying court to my mother, who will neither say point blank that she will not marry, nor yet bring matters to an end, so they are making havoc of my estate, and before long will do so with myself into the bargain.
The issue, however, rests with heaven.
But do you, old friend Eumaeus, go at once and tell Penelope that I am safe and have returned from Pylos.
Tell it to herself alone, and then come back here without letting any one else know, for there are many who are plotting mischief against me.” “I understand and heed you,” replied Eumaeus; “you need instruct me no further, only as I am going that way say whether I had not better let poor Laertes know that you are returned.
He used to superintend the work on his farm in spite of his bitter sorrow about Ulysses, and he would eat and drink at will along with his servants; but they tell me that from the day on which you set out for Pylos he has neither eaten nor drunk as he ought to do, nor does he look after his farm, but sits weeping and wasting the flesh from off his bones.” “More’s the pity,” answered Telemachus, “I am sorry for him, but we must leave him to himself just now.
If people could have everything their own way, the first thing I should choose would be the return of my father; but go, and give your message; then make haste back again, and do not turn out of your way to tell Laertes.
Tell my mother to send one of her women secretly with the news at once, and let him hear it from her.” Thus did he urge the swineherd; Eumaeus, therefore, took his sandals, bound them to his feet, and started for the town.
Minerva watched him well off the station, and then came up to it in the form of a woman—fair, stately, and wise.
She stood against the side of the entry, and revealed herself to Ulysses, but Telemachus could not see her, and knew not that she was there, for the gods do not let themselves be seen by everybody.
Ulysses saw her, and so did the dogs, for they did not bark, but went scared and whining off to the other side of the yards.
She nodded her head and motioned to Ulysses with her eyebrows; whereon he left the hut and stood before her outside the main wall of the yards.
Then she said to him: “Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, it is now time for you to tell your son: do not keep him in the dark any longer, but lay your plans for the destruction of the suitors, and then make for the town.
I will not be long in joining you, for I too am eager for the fray.” As she spoke she touched him with her golden wand.
First she threw a fair clean shirt and cloak about his shoulders; then she made him younger and of more imposing presence; she gave him back his colour, filled out his cheeks, and let his beard become dark again.
Then she went away and Ulysses came back inside the hut.
His son was astounded when he saw him, and turned his eyes away for fear he might be looking upon a god.
“Stranger,” said he, “how suddenly you have changed from what you were a moment or two ago.
You are dressed differently and your colour is not the same.
Are you some one or other of the gods that live in heaven?
If so, be propitious to me till I can make you due sacrifice and offerings of wrought gold.
Have mercy upon me.” And Ulysses said, “I am no god, why should you take me for one?
I am your father, on whose account you grieve and suffer so much at the hands of lawless men.” As he spoke he kissed his son, and a tear fell from his cheek on to the ground, for he had restrained all tears till now.
But Telemachus could not yet believe that it was his father, and said: “You are not my father, but some god is flattering me with vain hopes that I may grieve the more hereafter; no mortal man could of himself contrive to do as you have been doing, and make yourself old and young at a moment’s notice, unless a god were with him.
A second ago you were old and all in rags, and now you are like some god come down from heaven.” Ulysses answered, “Telemachus, you ought not to be so immeasurably astonished at my being really here.
There is no other Ulysses who will come hereafter.
Such as I am, it is I, who after long wandering and much hardship have got home in the twentieth year to my own country.
What you wonder at is the work of the redoubtable goddess Minerva, who does with me whatever she will, for she can do what she pleases.
At one moment she makes me like a beggar, and the next I am a young man with good clothes on my back; it is an easy matter for the gods who live in heaven to make any man look either rich or poor.” As he spoke he sat down, and Telemachus threw his arms about his father and wept.
They were both so much moved that they cried aloud like eagles or vultures with crooked talons that have been robbed of their half fledged young by peasants.
Thus piteously did they weep, and the sun would have gone down upon their mourning if Telemachus had not suddenly said, “In what ship, my dear father, did your crew bring you to Ithaca?
Of what nation did they declare themselves to be—for you cannot have come by land?” “I will tell you the truth, my son,” replied Ulysses.
“It was the Phaeacians who brought me here.
They are great sailors, and are in the habit of giving escorts to any one who reaches their coasts.
They took me over the sea while I was fast asleep, and landed me in Ithaca, after giving me many presents in bronze, gold, and raiment.
These things by heaven’s mercy are lying concealed in a cave, and I am now come here on the suggestion of Minerva that we may consult about killing our enemies.
First, therefore, give me a list of the suitors, with their number, that I may learn who, and how many, they are.
I can then turn the matter over in my mind, and see whether we two can fight the whole body of them ourselves, or whether we must find others to help us.” To this Telemachus answered, “Father, I have always heard of your renown both in the field and in council, but the task you talk of is a very great one: I am awed at the mere thought of it; two men cannot stand against many and brave ones.
There are not ten suitors only, nor twice ten, but ten many times over; you shall learn their number at once.
There are fifty-two chosen youths from Dulichium, and they have six servants; from Same there are twenty-four; twenty young Achaeans from Zacynthus, and twelve from Ithaca itself, all of them well born.
They have with them a servant Medon, a bard, and two men who can carve at table.
If we face such numbers as this, you may have bitter cause to rue your coming, and your revenge.
See whether you cannot think of some one who would be willing to come and help us.” “Listen to me,” replied Ulysses, “and think whether Minerva and her father Jove may seem sufficient, or whether I am to try and find some one else as well.” “Those whom you have named,” answered Telemachus, “are a couple of good allies, for though they dwell high up among the clouds they have power over both gods and men.” “These two,” continued Ulysses, “will not keep long out of the fray, when the suitors and we join fight in my house.
Now, therefore, return home early to-morrow morning, and go about among the suitors as before.
Later on the swineherd will bring me to the city disguised as a miserable old beggar.
If you see them ill treating me, steel your heart against my sufferings; even though they drag me feet foremost out of the house, or throw things at me, look on and do nothing beyond gently trying to make them behave more reasonably; but they will not listen to you, for the day of their reckoning is at hand.
Furthermore I say, and lay my saying to your heart; when Minerva shall put it in my mind, I will nod my head to you, and on seeing me do this you must collect all the armour that is in the house and hide it in the strong store room.
Make some excuse when the suitors ask you why you are removing it; say that you have taken it to be out of the way of the smoke, inasmuch as it is no longer what it was when Ulysses went away, but has become soiled and begrimed with soot.
Add to this more particularly that you are afraid Jove may set them on to quarrel over their wine, and that they may do each other some harm which may disgrace both banquet and wooing, for the sight of arms sometimes tempts people to use them.
But leave a sword and a spear apiece for yourself and me, and a couple of oxhide shields so that we can snatch them up at any moment; Jove and Minerva will then soon quiet these people.
There is also another matter; if you are indeed my son and my blood runs in your veins, let no one know that Ulysses is within the house—neither Laertes, nor yet the swineherd, nor any of the servants, nor even Penelope herself.
Let you and me exploit the women alone, and let us also make trial of some other of the men servants, to see who is on our side and whose hand is against us.” “Father,” replied Telemachus, “you will come to know me by and by, and when you do you will find that I can keep your counsel.
I do not think, however, the plan you propose will turn out well for either of us.
Think it over.
It will take us a long time to go the round of the farms and exploit the men, and all the time the suitors will be wasting your estate with impunity and without compunction.
Prove the women by all means, to see who are disloyal and who guiltless, but I am not in favour of going round and trying the men.
We can attend to that later on, if you really have some sign from Jove that he will support you.” Thus did they converse, and meanwhile the ship which had brought Telemachus and his crew from Pylos had reached the town of Ithaca.
When they had come inside the harbour they drew the ship on to the land; their servants came and took their armour from them, and they left all the presents at the house of Clytius.
Then they sent a servant to tell Penelope that Telemachus had gone into the country, but had sent the ship to the town to prevent her from being alarmed and made unhappy.
This servant and Eumaeus happened to meet when they were both on the same errand of going to tell Penelope.
When they reached the House, the servant stood up and said to the queen in the presence of the waiting women, “Your son, Madam, is now returned from Pylos”; but Eumaeus went close up to Penelope, and said privately all that her son had bidden him tell her.
When he had given his message he left the house with its outbuildings and went back to his pigs again.
The suitors were surprised and angry at what had happened, so they went outside the great wall that ran round the outer court, and held a council near the main entrance.
Eurymachus, son of Polybus, was the first to speak.
“My friends,” said he, “this voyage of Telemachus’s is a very serious matter; we had made sure that it would come to nothing.
Now, however, let us draw a ship into the water, and get a crew together to send after the others and tell them to come back as fast as they can.” He had hardly done speaking when Amphinomus turned in his place and saw the ship inside the harbour, with the crew lowering her sails, and putting by their oars; so he laughed, and said to the others, “We need not send them any message, for they are here.
Some god must have told them, or else they saw the ship go by, and could not overtake her.” On this they rose and went to the water side.
The crew then drew the ship on shore; their servants took their armour from them, and they went up in a body to the place of assembly, but they would not let any one old or young sit along with them, and Antinous, son of Eupeithes, spoke first.
“Good heavens,” said he, “see how the gods have saved this man from destruction.
We kept a succession of scouts upon the headlands all day long, and when the sun was down we never went on shore to sleep, but waited in the ship all night till morning in the hope of capturing and killing him; but some god has conveyed him home in spite of us.
Let us consider how we can make an end of him.
He must not escape us; our affair is never likely to come off while he is alive, for he is very shrewd, and public feeling is by no means all on our side.
We must make haste before he can call the Achaeans in assembly; he will lose no time in doing so, for he will be furious with us, and will tell all the world how we plotted to kill him, but failed to take him.
The people will not like this when they come to know of it; we must see that they do us no hurt, nor drive us from our own country into exile.
Let us try and lay hold of him either on his farm away from the town, or on the road hither.
Then we can divide up his property amongst us, and let his mother and the man who marries her have the house.
If this does not please you, and you wish Telemachus to live on and hold his father’s property, then we must not gather here and eat up his goods in this way, but must make our offers to Penelope each from his own house, and she can marry the man who will give the most for her, and whose lot it is to win her.” They all held their peace until Amphinomus rose to speak.
He was the son of Nisus, who was son to king Aretias, and he was foremost among all the suitors from the wheat-growing and well grassed island of Dulichium; his conversation, moreover, was more agreeable to Penelope than that of any of the other suitors, for he was a man of good natural disposition.
“My friends,” said he, speaking to them plainly and in all honestly, “I am not in favour of killing Telemachus.
It is a heinous thing to kill one who is of noble blood.
Let us first take counsel of the gods, and if the oracles of Jove advise it, I will both help to kill him myself, and will urge everyone else to do so; but if they dissuade us, I would have you hold your hands.” Thus did he speak, and his words pleased them well, so they rose forthwith and went to the house of Ulysses, where they took their accustomed seats.
Then Penelope resolved that she would show herself to the suitors.
She knew of the plot against Telemachus, for the servant Medon had overheard their counsels and had told her; she went down therefore to the court attended by her maidens, and when she reached the suitors she stood by one of the bearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloister holding a veil before her face, and rebuked Antinous saying: “Antinous, insolent and wicked schemer, they say you are the best speaker and counsellor of any man your own age in Ithaca, but you are nothing of the kind.
Madman, why should you try to compass the death of Telemachus, and take no heed of suppliants, whose witness is Jove himself?
It is not right for you to plot thus against one another.
Do you not remember how your father fled to this house in fear of the people, who were enraged against him for having gone with some Taphian pirates and plundered the Thesprotians who were at peace with us?
They wanted to tear him in pieces and eat up everything he had, but Ulysses stayed their hands although they were infuriated, and now you devour his property without paying for it, and break my heart by wooing his wife and trying to kill his son.
Leave off doing so, and stop the others also.” To this Eurymachus son of Polybus answered, “Take heart, Queen Penelope daughter of Icarius, and do not trouble yourself about these matters.
The man is not yet born, nor never will be, who shall lay hands upon your son Telemachus, while I yet live to look upon the face of the earth.
I say—and it shall surely be—that my spear shall be reddened with his blood; for many a time has Ulysses taken me on his knees, held wine up to my lips to drink, and put pieces of meat into my hands.
Therefore Telemachus is much the dearest friend I have, and has nothing to fear from the hands of us suitors.
Of course, if death comes to him from the gods, he cannot escape it.” He said this to quiet her, but in reality he was plotting against Telemachus.
Then Penelope went upstairs again and mourned her husband till Minerva shed sleep over her eyes.
In the evening Eumaeus got back to Ulysses and his son, who had just sacrificed a young pig of a year old and were helping one another to get supper ready; Minerva therefore came up to Ulysses, turned him into an old man with a stroke of her wand, and clad him in his old clothes again, for fear that the swineherd might recognise him and not keep the secret, but go and tell Penelope.
Telemachus was the first to speak.
“So you have got back, Eumaeus,” said he.
“What is the news of the town?
Have the suitors returned, or are they still waiting over yonder, to take me on my way home?” “I did not think of asking about that,” replied Eumaeus, “when I was in the town.
I thought I would give my message and come back as soon as I could.
I met a man sent by those who had gone with you to Pylos, and he was the first to tell the news to your mother, but I can say what I saw with my own eyes; I had just got on to the crest of the hill of Mercury above the town when I saw a ship coming into harbour with a number of men in her.
They had many shields and spears, and I thought it was the suitors, but I cannot be sure.” On hearing this Telemachus smiled to his father, but so that Eumaeus could not see him.
Then, when they had finished their work and the meal was ready, they ate it, and every man had his full share so that all were satisfied.
As soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, they laid down to rest and enjoyed the boon of sleep.
BOOK XVII TELEMACHUS AND HIS MOTHER MEET—ULYSSES AND EUMAEUS COME DOWN TO THE TOWN, AND ULYSSES IS INSULTED BY MELANTHIUS—HE IS RECOGNISED BY THE DOG ARGOS—HE IS INSULTED AND PRESENTLY STRUCK BY ANTINOUS WITH A STOOL—PENELOPE DESIRES THAT HE SHALL BE SENT TO HER.
When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, Telemachus bound on his sandals and took a strong spear that suited his hands, for he wanted to go into the city.
“Old friend,” said he to the swineherd, “I will now go to the town and show myself to my mother, for she will never leave off grieving till she has seen me.
As for this unfortunate stranger, take him to the town and let him beg there of any one who will give him a drink and a piece of bread.
I have trouble enough of my own, and cannot be burdened with other people.
If this makes him angry so much the worse for him, but I like to say what I mean.” Then Ulysses said, “Sir, I do not want to stay here; a beggar can always do better in town than country, for any one who likes can give him something.
I am too old to care about remaining here at the beck and call of a master.
Therefore let this man do as you have just told him, and take me to the town as soon as I have had a warm by the fire, and the day has got a little heat in it.
My clothes are wretchedly thin, and this frosty morning I shall be perished with cold, for you say the city is some way off.” On this Telemachus strode off through the yards, brooding his revenge upon the suitors.
When he reached home he stood his spear against a bearing-post of the cloister, crossed the stone floor of the cloister itself, and went inside.
Nurse Euryclea saw him long before any one else did.
She was putting the fleeces on to the seats, and she burst out crying as she ran up to him; all the other maids came up too, and covered his head and shoulders with their kisses.
Penelope came out of her room looking like Diana or Venus, and wept as she flung her arms about her son.
She kissed his forehead and both his beautiful eyes, “Light of my eyes,” she cried as she spoke fondly to him, “so you are come home again; I made sure I was never going to see you any more.
To think of your having gone off to Pylos without saying anything about it or obtaining my consent.
But come, tell me what you saw.” “Do not scold me, mother,” answered Telemachus, “nor vex me, seeing what a narrow escape I have had, but wash your face, change your dress, go upstairs with your maids, and promise full and sufficient hecatombs to all the gods if Jove will only grant us our revenge upon the suitors.
I must now go to the place of assembly to invite a stranger who has come back with me from Pylos.
I sent him on with my crew, and told Piraeus to take him home and look after him till I could come for him myself.” She heeded her son’s words, washed her face, changed her dress, and vowed full and sufficient hecatombs to all the gods if they would only vouchsafe her revenge upon the suitors.
Telemachus went through, and out of, the cloisters spear in hand—not alone, for his two fleet dogs went with him.
Minerva endowed him with a presence of such divine comeliness that all marvelled at him as he went by, and the suitors gathered round him with fair words in their mouths and malice in their hearts; but he avoided them, and went to sit with Mentor, Antiphus, and Halitherses, old friends of his father’s house, and they made him tell them all that had happened to him.
Then Piraeus came up with Theoclymenus, whom he had escorted through the town to the place of assembly, whereon Telemachus at once joined them.
Piraeus was first to speak: “Telemachus,” said he, “I wish you would send some of your women to my house to take away the presents Menelaus gave you.” “We do not know, Piraeus,” answered Telemachus, “what may happen.
If the suitors kill me in my own house and divide my property among them, I would rather you had the presents than that any of those people should get hold of them.
If on the other hand I managed to kill them, I shall be much obliged if you will kindly bring me my presents.” With these words he took Theoclymenus to his own house.
When they got there they laid their cloaks on the benches and seats, went into the baths, and washed themselves.
When the maids had washed and anointed them, and had given them cloaks and shirts, they took their seats at table.
A maid servant then brought them water in a beautiful golden ewer, and poured it into a silver basin for them to wash their hands; and she drew a clean table beside them.
An upper servant brought them bread and offered them many good things of what there was in the house.
Opposite them sat Penelope, reclining on a couch by one of the bearing-posts of the cloister, and spinning.
Then they laid their hands on the good things that were before them, and as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink Penelope said: “Telemachus, I shall go upstairs and lie down on that sad couch, which I have not ceased to water with my tears, from the day Ulysses set out for Troy with the sons of Atreus.
You failed, however, to make it clear to me before the suitors came back to the house, whether or no you had been able to hear anything about the return of your father.” “I will tell you then truth,” replied her son.
“We went to Pylos and saw Nestor, who took me to his house and treated me as hospitably as though I were a son of his own who had just returned after a long absence; so also did his sons; but he said he had not heard a word from any human being about Ulysses, whether he was alive or dead.
He sent me, therefore, with a chariot and horses to Menelaus.
There I saw Helen, for whose sake so many, both Argives and Trojans, were in heaven’s wisdom doomed to suffer.
Menelaus asked me what it was that had brought me to Lacedaemon, and I told him the whole truth, whereon he said, ‘So, then, these cowards would usurp a brave man’s bed?
A hind might as well lay her new-born young in the lair of a lion, and then go off to feed in the forest or in some grassy dell.
The lion, when he comes back to his lair, will make short work with the pair of them, and so will Ulysses with these suitors.
By father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, if Ulysses is still the man that he was when he wrestled with Philomeleides in Lesbos, and threw him so heavily that all the Greeks cheered him—if he is still such, and were to come near these suitors, they would have a short shrift and a sorry wedding.
As regards your question, however, I will not prevaricate nor deceive you, but what the old man of the sea told me, so much will I tell you in full.
He said he could see Ulysses on an island sorrowing bitterly in the house of the nymph Calypso, who was keeping him prisoner, and he could not reach his home, for he had no ships nor sailors to take him over the sea.’ This was what Menelaus told me, and when I had heard his story I came away; the gods then gave me a fair wind and soon brought me safe home again.” With these words he moved the heart of Penelope.
Then Theoclymenus said to her: “Madam, wife of Ulysses, Telemachus does not understand these things; listen therefore to me, for I can divine them surely, and will hide nothing from you.
May Jove the king of heaven be my witness, and the rites of hospitality, with that hearth of Ulysses to which I now come, that Ulysses himself is even now in Ithaca, and, either going about the country or staying in one place, is enquiring into all these evil deeds and preparing a day of reckoning for the suitors.
I saw an omen when I was on the ship which meant this, and I told Telemachus about it.” “May it be even so,” answered Penelope; “if your words come true, you shall have such gifts and such good will from me that all who see you shall congratulate you.” Thus did they converse.
Meanwhile the suitors were throwing discs, or aiming with spears at a mark on the levelled ground in front of the house, and behaving with all their old insolence.
But when it was now time for dinner, and the flock of sheep and goats had come into the town from all the country round, 140 with their shepherds as usual, then Medon, who was their favourite servant, and who waited upon them at table, said, “Now then, my young masters, you have had enough sport, so come inside that we may get dinner ready.
Dinner is not a bad thing, at dinner time.” They left their sports as he told them, and when they were within the house, they laid their cloaks on the benches and seats inside, and then sacrificed some sheep, goats, pigs, and a heifer, all of them fat and well grown.141 Thus they made ready for their meal.
In the meantime Ulysses and the swineherd were about starting for the town, and the swineherd said, “Stranger, I suppose you still want to go to town to-day, as my master said you were to do; for my own part I should have liked you to stay here as a station hand, but I must do as my master tells me, or he will scold me later on, and a scolding from one’s master is a very serious thing.
Let us then be off, for it is now broad day; it will be night again directly and then you will find it colder.”142 “I know, and understand you,” replied Ulysses; “you need say no more.
Let us be going, but if you have a stick ready cut, let me have it to walk with, for you say the road is a very rough one.” As he spoke he threw his shabby old tattered wallet over his shoulders, by the cord from which it hung, and Eumaeus gave him a stick to his liking.
The two then started, leaving the station in charge of the dogs and herdsmen who remained behind; the swineherd led the way and his master followed after, looking like some broken down old tramp as he leaned upon his staff, and his clothes were all in rags.
When they had got over the rough steep ground and were nearing the city, they reached the fountain from which the citizens drew their water.
This had been made by Ithacus, Neritus, and Polyctor.
There was a grove of water-loving poplars planted in a circle all round it, and the clear cold water came down to it from a rock high up,143 while above the fountain there was an altar to the nymphs, at which all wayfarers used to sacrifice.
Here Melanthius son of Dolius overtook them as he was driving down some goats, the best in his flock, for the suitors’ dinner, and there were two shepherds with him.
When he saw Eumaeus and Ulysses he reviled them with outrageous and unseemly language, which made Ulysses very angry.
“There you go,” cried he, “and a precious pair you are.
See how heaven brings birds of the same feather to one another.
Where, pray, master swineherd, are you taking this poor miserable object?
It would make any one sick to see such a creature at table.
A fellow like this never won a prize for anything in his life, but will go about rubbing his shoulders against every man’s door post, and begging, not for swords and cauldrons144 like a man, but only for a few scraps not worth begging for.
If you would give him to me for a hand on my station, he might do to clean out the folds, or bring a bit of sweet feed to the kids, and he could fatten his thighs as much as he pleased on whey; but he has taken to bad ways and will not go about any kind of work; he will do nothing but beg victuals all the town over, to feed his insatiable belly.
I say, therefore—and it shall surely be—if he goes near Ulysses’ house he will get his head broken by the stools they will fling at him, till they turn him out.” On this, as he passed, he gave Ulysses a kick on the hip out of pure wantonness, but Ulysses stood firm, and did not budge from the path.
For a moment he doubted whether or no to fly at Melanthius and kill him with his staff, or fling him to the ground and beat his brains out; he resolved, however, to endure it and keep himself in check, but the swineherd looked straight at Melanthius and rebuked him, lifting up his hands and praying to heaven as he did so.
“Fountain nymphs,” he cried, “children of Jove, if ever Ulysses burned you thigh bones covered with fat whether of lambs or kids, grant my prayer that heaven may send him home.
He would soon put an end to the swaggering threats with which such men as you go about insulting people—gadding all over the town while your flocks are going to ruin through bad shepherding.” Then Melanthius the goatherd answered, “You ill conditioned cur, what are you talking about?
Some day or other I will put you on board ship and take you to a foreign country, where I can sell you and pocket the money you will fetch.
I wish I were as sure that Apollo would strike Telemachus dead this very day, or that the suitors would kill him, as I am that Ulysses will never come home again.” With this he left them to come on at their leisure, while he went quickly forward and soon reached the house of his master.
When he got there he went in and took his seat among the suitors opposite Eurymachus, who liked him better than any of the others.
The servants brought him a portion of meat, and an upper woman servant set bread before him that he might eat.
Presently Ulysses and the swineherd came up to the house and stood by it, amid a sound of music, for Phemius was just beginning to sing to the suitors.
Then Ulysses took hold of the swineherd’s hand, and said: “Eumaeus, this house of Ulysses is a very fine place.
No matter how far you go, you will find few like it.
One building keeps following on after another.
The outer court has a wall with battlements all round it; the doors are double folding, and of good workmanship; it would be a hard matter to take it by force of arms.
I perceive, too, that there are many people banqueting within it, for there is a smell of roast meat, and I hear a sound of music, which the gods have made to go along with feasting.” Then Eumaeus said, “You have perceived aright, as indeed you generally do; but let us think what will be our best course.
Will you go inside first and join the suitors, leaving me here behind you, or will you wait here and let me go in first?
But do not wait long, or some one may see you loitering about outside, and throw something at you.
Consider this matter I pray you.” And Ulysses answered, “I understand and heed.
Go in first and leave me here where I am.
I am quite used to being beaten and having things thrown at me.
I have been so much buffeted about in war and by sea that I am case-hardened, and this too may go with the rest.
But a man cannot hide away the cravings of a hungry belly; this is an enemy which gives much trouble to all men; it is because of this that ships are fitted out to sail the seas, and to make war upon other people.” As they were thus talking, a dog that had been lying asleep raised his head and pricked up his ears.
This was Argos, whom Ulysses had bred before setting out for Troy, but he had never had any work out of him.
In the old days he used to be taken out by the young men when they went hunting wild goats, or deer, or hares, but now that his master was gone he was lying neglected on the heaps of mule and cow dung that lay in front of the stable doors till the men should come and draw it away to manure the great close; and he was full of fleas.
As soon as he saw Ulysses standing there, he dropped his ears and wagged his tail, but he could not get close up to his master.
When Ulysses saw the dog on the other side of the yard, he dashed a tear from his eyes without Eumaeus seeing it, and said: “Eumaeus, what a noble hound that is over yonder on the manure heap: his build is splendid; is he as fine a fellow as he looks, or is he only one of those dogs that come begging about a table, and are kept merely for show?” “This hound,” answered Eumaeus, “belonged to him who has died in a far country.
If he were what he was when Ulysses left for Troy, he would soon show you what he could do.
There was not a wild beast in the forest that could get away from him when he was once on its tracks.
But now he has fallen on evil times, for his master is dead and gone, and the women take no care of him.
Servants never do their work when their master’s hand is no longer over them, for Jove takes half the goodness out of a man when he makes a slave of him.” As he spoke he went inside the buildings to the cloister where the suitors were, but Argos died as soon as he had recognised his master.
Telemachus saw Eumaeus long before any one else did, and beckoned him to come and sit beside him; so he looked about and saw a seat lying near where the carver sat serving out their portions to the suitors; he picked it up, brought it to Telemachus’s table, and sat down opposite him.
Then the servant brought him his portion, and gave him bread from the bread-basket.
Immediately afterwards Ulysses came inside, looking like a poor miserable old beggar, leaning on his staff and with his clothes all in rags.
He sat down upon the threshold of ash-wood just inside the doors leading from the outer to the inner court, and against a bearing-post of cypress-wood which the carpenter had skilfully planed, and had made to join truly with rule and line.
Telemachus took a whole loaf from the bread-basket, with as much meat as he could hold in his two hands, and said to Eumaeus, “Take this to the stranger, and tell him to go the round of the suitors, and beg from them; a beggar must not be shamefaced.” So Eumaeus went up to him and said, “Stranger, Telemachus sends you this, and says you are to go the round of the suitors begging, for beggars must not be shamefaced.” Ulysses answered, “May King Jove grant all happiness to Telemachus, and fulfil the desire of his heart.” Then with both hands he took what Telemachus had sent him, and laid it on the dirty old wallet at his feet.
He went on eating it while the bard was singing, and had just finished his dinner as he left off.
The suitors applauded the bard, whereon Minerva went up to Ulysses and prompted him to beg pieces of bread from each one of the suitors, that he might see what kind of people they were, and tell the good from the bad; but come what might she was not going to save a single one of them.
Ulysses, therefore, went on his round, going from left to right, and stretched out his hands to beg as though he were a real beggar.
Some of them pitied him, and were curious about him, asking one another who he was and where he came from; whereon the goatherd Melanthius said, “Suitors of my noble mistress, I can tell you something about him, for I have seen him before.
The swineherd brought him here, but I know nothing about the man himself, nor where he comes from.” On this Antinous began to abuse the swineherd.
“You precious idiot,” he cried, “what have you brought this man to town for?
Have we not tramps and beggars enough already to pester us as we sit at meat?
Do you think it a small thing that such people gather here to waste your master’s property—and must you needs bring this man as well?” And Eumaeus answered, “Antinous, your birth is good but your words evil.
It was no doing of mine that he came here.
Who is likely to invite a stranger from a foreign country, unless it be one of those who can do public service as a seer, a healer of hurts, a carpenter, or a bard who can charm us with his singing?
Such men are welcome all the world over, but no one is likely to ask a beggar who will only worry him.
You are always harder on Ulysses’ servants than any of the other suitors are, and above all on me, but I do not care so long as Telemachus and Penelope are alive and here.” But Telemachus said, “Hush, do not answer him; Antinous has the bitterest tongue of all the suitors, and he makes the others worse.” Then turning to Antinous he said, “Antinous, you take as much care of my interests as though I were your son.
Why should you want to see this stranger turned out of the house?
Heaven forbid; take something and give it him yourself; I do not grudge it; I bid you take it.
Never mind my mother, nor any of the other servants in the house; but I know you will not do what I say, for you are more fond of eating things yourself than of giving them to other people.” “What do you mean, Telemachus,” replied Antinous, “by this swaggering talk?
If all the suitors were to give him as much as I will, he would not come here again for another three months.” As he spoke he drew the stool on which he rested his dainty feet from under the table, and made as though he would throw it at Ulysses, but the other suitors all gave him something, and filled his wallet with bread and meat; he was about, therefore, to go back to the threshold and eat what the suitors had given him, but he first went up to Antinous and said: “Sir, give me something; you are not, surely, the poorest man here; you seem to be a chief, foremost among them all; therefore you should be the better giver, and I will tell far and wide of your bounty.
I too was a rich man once, and had a fine house of my own; in those days I gave to many a tramp such as I now am, no matter who he might be nor what he wanted.
I had any number of servants, and all the other things which people have who live well and are accounted wealthy, but it pleased Jove to take all away from me.
He sent me with a band of roving robbers to Egypt; it was a long voyage and I was undone by it.
I stationed my ships in the river Aegyptus, and bade my men stay by them and keep guard over them, while I sent out scouts to reconnoitre from every point of vantage.
“But the men disobeyed my orders, took to their own devices, and ravaged the land of the Egyptians, killing the men, and taking their wives and children captives.
The alarm was soon carried to the city, and when they heard the war-cry, the people came out at daybreak till the plain was filled with soldiers horse and foot, and with the gleam of armour.
Then Jove spread panic among my men, and they would no longer face the enemy, for they found themselves surrounded.
The Egyptians killed many of us, and took the rest alive to do forced labour for them; as for myself, they gave me to a friend who met them, to take to Cyprus, Dmetor by name, son of Iasus, who was a great man in Cyprus.
Thence I am come hither in a state of great misery.” Then Antinous said, “What god can have sent such a pestilence to plague us during our dinner?
Get out, into the open part of the court,145 or I will give you Egypt and Cyprus over again for your insolence and importunity; you have begged of all the others, and they have given you lavishly, for they have abundance round them, and it is easy to be free with other people’s property when there is plenty of it.” On this Ulysses began to move off, and said, “Your looks, my fine sir, are better than your breeding; if you were in your own house you would not spare a poor man so much as a pinch of salt, for though you are in another man’s, and surrounded with abundance, you cannot find it in you to give him even a piece of bread.” This made Antinous very angry, and he scowled at him saying, “You shall pay for this before you get clear of the court.” With these words he threw a footstool at him, and hit him on the right shoulder blade near the top of his back.
Ulysses stood firm as a rock and the blow did not even stagger him, but he shook his head in silence as he brooded on his revenge.
Then he went back to the threshold and sat down there, laying his well filled wallet at his feet.
“Listen to me,” he cried, “you suitors of Queen Penelope, that I may speak even as I am minded.
A man knows neither ache nor pain if he gets hit while fighting for his money, or for his sheep or his cattle; and even so Antinous has hit me while in the service of my miserable belly, which is always getting people into trouble.
Still, if the poor have gods and avenging deities at all, I pray them that Antinous may come to a bad end before his marriage.” “Sit where you are, and eat your victuals in silence, or be off elsewhere,” shouted Antinous.
“If you say more I will have you dragged hand and foot through the courts, and the servants shall flay you alive.” The other suitors were much displeased at this, and one of the young men said, “Antinous, you did ill in striking that poor wretch of a tramp: it will be worse for you if he should turn out to be some god—and we know the gods go about disguised in all sorts of ways as people from foreign countries, and travel about the world to see who do amiss and who righteously.”146 Thus said the suitors, but Antinous paid them no heed.
Meanwhile Telemachus was furious about the blow that had been given to his father, and though no tear fell from him, he shook his head in silence and brooded on his revenge.
Now when Penelope heard that the beggar had been struck in the banqueting-cloister, she said before her maids, “Would that Apollo would so strike you, Antinous,” and her waiting woman Eurynome answered, “If our prayers were answered not one of the suitors would ever again see the sun rise.” Then Penelope said, “Nurse,147 I hate every single one of them, for they mean nothing but mischief, but I hate Antinous like the darkness of death itself.
A poor unfortunate tramp has come begging about the house for sheer want.
Every one else has given him something to put in his wallet, but Antinous has hit him on the right shoulder-blade with a footstool.” Thus did she talk with her maids as she sat in her own room, and in the meantime Ulysses was getting his dinner.
Then she called for the swineherd and said, “Eumaeus, go and tell the stranger to come here, I want to see him and ask him some questions.
He seems to have travelled much, and he may have seen or heard something of my unhappy husband.” To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “If these Achaeans, Madam, would only keep quiet, you would be charmed with the history of his adventures.
I had him three days and three nights with me in my hut, which was the first place he reached after running away from his ship, and he has not yet completed the story of his misfortunes.
If he had been the most heaven-taught minstrel in the whole world, on whose lips all hearers hang entranced, I could not have been more charmed as I sat in my hut and listened to him.
He says there is an old friendship between his house and that of Ulysses, and that he comes from Crete where the descendants of Minos live, after having been driven hither and thither by every kind of misfortune; he also declares that he has heard of Ulysses as being alive and near at hand among the Thesprotians, and that he is bringing great wealth home with him.” “Call him here, then,” said Penelope, “that I too may hear his story.
As for the suitors, let them take their pleasure indoors or out as they will, for they have nothing to fret about.
Their corn and wine remain unwasted in their houses with none but servants to consume them, while they keep hanging about our house day after day sacrificing our oxen, sheep, and fat goats for their banquets, and never giving so much as a thought to the quantity of wine they drink.
No estate can stand such recklessness, for we have now no Ulysses to protect us.
If he were to come again, he and his son would soon have their revenge.” As she spoke Telemachus sneezed so loudly that the whole house resounded with it.
Penelope laughed when she heard this, and said to Eumaeus, “Go and call the stranger; did you not hear how my son sneezed just as I was speaking?
This can only mean that all the suitors are going to be killed, and that not one of them shall escape.
Furthermore I say, and lay my saying to your heart: if I am satisfied that the stranger is speaking the truth I shall give him a shirt and cloak of good wear.” When Eumaeus heard this he went straight to Ulysses and said, “Father stranger, my mistress Penelope, mother of Telemachus, has sent for you; she is in great grief, but she wishes to hear anything you can tell her about her husband, and if she is satisfied that you are speaking the truth, she will give you a shirt and cloak, which are the very things that you are most in want of.
As for bread, you can get enough of that to fill your belly, by begging about the town, and letting those give that will.” “I will tell Penelope,” answered Ulysses, “nothing but what is strictly true.
I know all about her husband, and have been partner with him in affliction, but I am afraid of passing through this crowd of cruel suitors, for their pride and insolence reach heaven.
Just now, moreover, as I was going about the house without doing any harm, a man gave me a blow that hurt me very much, but neither Telemachus nor any one else defended me.
Tell Penelope, therefore, to be patient and wait till sundown.
Let her give me a seat close up to the fire, for my clothes are worn very thin—you know they are, for you have seen them ever since I first asked you to help me—she can then ask me about the return of her husband.” The swineherd went back when he heard this, and Penelope said as she saw him cross the threshold, “Why do you not bring him here, Eumaeus?
Is he afraid that some one will ill-treat him, or is he shy of coming inside the house at all?
Beggars should not be shamefaced.” To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “The stranger is quite reasonable.
He is avoiding the suitors, and is only doing what any one else would do.
He asks you to wait till sundown, and it will be much better, madam, that you should have him all to yourself, when you can hear him and talk to him as you will.” “The man is no fool,” answered Penelope, “it would very likely be as he says, for there are no such abominable people in the whole world as these men are.” When she had done speaking Eumaeus went back to the suitors, for he had explained everything.
Then he went up to Telemachus and said in his ear so that none could overhear him, “My dear sir, I will now go back to the pigs, to see after your property and my own business.
You will look to what is going on here, but above all be careful to keep out of danger, for there are many who bear you ill will.
May Jove bring them to a bad end before they do us a mischief.” “Very well,” replied Telemachus, “go home when you have had your dinner, and in the morning come here with the victims we are to sacrifice for the day.
Leave the rest to heaven and me.” On this Eumaeus took his seat again, and when he had finished his dinner he left the courts and the cloister with the men at table, and went back to his pigs.
As for the suitors, they presently began to amuse themselves with singing and dancing, for it was now getting on towards evening.
BOOK XVIII THE FIGHT WITH IRUS—ULYSSES WARNS AMPHINOMUS—PENELOPE GETS PRESENTS FROM THE SUITORS—THE BRAZIERS—ULYSSES REBUKES EURYMACHUS.
Now there came a certain common tramp who used to go begging all over the city of Ithaca, and was notorious as an incorrigible glutton and drunkard.
This man had no strength nor stay in him, but he was a great hulking fellow to look at; his real name, the one his mother gave him, was Arnaeus, but the young men of the place called him Irus,148 because he used to run errands for any one who would send him.
As soon as he came he began to insult Ulysses, and to try and drive him out of his own house.
“Be off, old man,” he cried, “from the doorway, or you shall be dragged out neck and heels.
Do you not see that they are all giving me the wink, and wanting me to turn you out by force, only I do not like to do so?
Get up then, and go of yourself, or we shall come to blows.” Ulysses frowned on him and said, “My friend, I do you no manner of harm; people give you a great deal, but I am not jealous.
There is room enough in this doorway for the pair of us, and you need not grudge me things that are not yours to give.
You seem to be just such another tramp as myself, but perhaps the gods will give us better luck by and by.
Do not, however, talk too much about fighting or you will incense me, and old though I am, I shall cover your mouth and chest with blood.
I shall have more peace tomorrow if I do, for you will not come to the house of Ulysses any more.” Irus was very angry and answered, “You filthy glutton, you run on trippingly like an old fish-fag.
I have a good mind to lay both hands about you, and knock your teeth out of your head like so many boar’s tusks.
Get ready, therefore, and let these people here stand by and look on.
You will never be able to fight one who is so much younger than yourself.” Thus roundly did they rate one another on the smooth pavement in front of the doorway,149 and when Antinous saw what was going on he laughed heartily and said to the others, “This is the finest sport that you ever saw; heaven never yet sent anything like it into this house.
The stranger and Irus have quarreled and are going to fight, let us set them on to do so at once.” The suitors all came up laughing, and gathered round the two ragged tramps.
“Listen to me,” said Antinous, “there are some goats’ paunches down at the fire, which we have filled with blood and fat, and set aside for supper; he who is victorious and proves himself to be the better man shall have his pick of the lot; he shall be free of our table and we will not allow any other beggar about the house at all.” The others all agreed, but Ulysses, to throw them off the scent, said, “Sirs, an old man like myself, worn out with suffering, cannot hold his own against a young one; but my irrepressible belly urges me on, though I know it can only end in my getting a drubbing.
You must swear, however that none of you will give me a foul blow to favour Irus and secure him the victory.” They swore as he told them, and when they had completed their oath Telemachus put in a word and said, “Stranger, if you have a mind to settle with this fellow, you need not be afraid of any one here.
Whoever strikes you will have to fight more than one.
I am host, and the other chiefs, Antinous and Eurymachus, both of them men of understanding, are of the same mind as I am.” Every one assented, and Ulysses girded his old rags about his loins, thus baring his stalwart thighs, his broad chest and shoulders, and his mighty arms; but Minerva came up to him and made his limbs even stronger still.
The suitors were beyond measure astonished, and one would turn towards his neighbour saying, “The stranger has brought such a thigh out of his old rags that there will soon be nothing left of Irus.” Irus began to be very uneasy as he heard them, but the servants girded him by force, and brought him [into the open part of the court] in such a fright that his limbs were all of a tremble.
Antinous scolded him and said, “You swaggering bully, you ought never to have been born at all if you are afraid of such an old broken down creature as this tramp is.
I say, therefore—and it shall surely be—if he beats you and proves himself the better man, I shall pack you off on board ship to the mainland and send you to king Echetus, who kills every one that comes near him.
He will cut off your nose and ears, and draw out your entrails for the dogs to eat.” This frightened Irus still more, but they brought him into the middle of the court, and the two men raised their hands to fight.
Then Ulysses considered whether he should let drive so hard at him as to make an end of him then and there, or whether he should give him a lighter blow that should only knock him down; in the end he deemed it best to give the lighter blow for fear the Achaeans should begin to suspect who he was.
Then they began to fight, and Irus hit Ulysses on the right shoulder; but Ulysses gave Irus a blow on the neck under the ear that broke in the bones of his skull, and the blood came gushing out of his mouth; he fell groaning in the dust, gnashing his teeth and kicking on the ground, but the suitors threw up their hands and nearly died of laughter, as Ulysses caught hold of him by the foot and dragged him into the outer court as far as the gate-house.
There he propped him up against the wall and put his staff in his hands.
“Sit here,” said he, “and keep the dogs and pigs off; you are a pitiful creature, and if you try to make yourself king of the beggars any more you shall fare still worse.” Then he threw his dirty old wallet, all tattered and torn over his shoulder with the cord by which it hung, and went back to sit down upon the threshold; but the suitors went within the cloisters, laughing and saluting him, “May Jove, and all the other gods,” said they, “grant you whatever you want for having put an end to the importunity of this insatiable tramp.
We will take him over to the mainland presently, to king Echetus, who kills every one that comes near him.” Ulysses hailed this as of good omen, and Antinous set a great goat’s paunch before him filled with blood and fat.
Amphinomus took two loaves out of the bread-basket and brought them to him, pledging him as he did so in a golden goblet of wine.
“Good luck to you,” he said, “father stranger, you are very badly off at present, but I hope you will have better times by and by.” To this Ulysses answered, “Amphinomus, you seem to be a man of good understanding, as indeed you may well be, seeing whose son you are.
I have heard your father well spoken of; he is Nisus of Dulichium, a man both brave and wealthy.
They tell me you are his son, and you appear to be a considerable person; listen, therefore, and take heed to what I am saying.
Man is the vainest of all creatures that have their being upon earth.
As long as heaven vouchsafes him health and strength, he thinks that he shall come to no harm hereafter, and even when the blessed gods bring sorrow upon him, he bears it as he needs must, and makes the best of it; for God almighty gives men their daily minds day by day.
I know all about it, for I was a rich man once, and did much wrong in the stubbornness of my pride, and in the confidence that my father and my brothers would support me; therefore let a man fear God in all things always, and take the good that heaven may see fit to send him without vain glory.
Consider the infamy of what these suitors are doing; see how they are wasting the estate, and doing dishonour to the wife, of one who is certain to return some day, and that, too, not long hence.
Nay, he will be here soon; may heaven send you home quietly first that you may not meet with him in the day of his coming, for once he is here the suitors and he will not part bloodlessly.” With these words he made a drink-offering, and when he had drunk he put the gold cup again into the hands of Amphinomus, who walked away serious and bowing his head, for he foreboded evil.
But even so he did not escape destruction, for Minerva had doomed him to fall by the hand of Telemachus.
So he took his seat again at the place from which he had come.
Then Minerva put it into the mind of Penelope to show herself to the suitors, that she might make them still more enamoured of her, and win still further honour from her son and husband.
So she feigned a mocking laugh and said, “Eurynome, I have changed my mind, and have a fancy to show myself to the suitors although I detest them.
I should like also to give my son a hint that he had better not have anything more to do with them.
They speak fairly enough but they mean mischief.” “My dear child,” answered Eurynome, “all that you have said is true, go and tell your son about it, but first wash yourself and anoint your face.
Do not go about with your cheeks all covered with tears; it is not right that you should grieve so incessantly; for Telemachus, whom you always prayed that you might live to see with a beard, is already grown up.” “I know, Eurynome,” replied Penelope, “that you mean well, but do not try and persuade me to wash and to anoint myself, for heaven robbed me of all my beauty on the day my husband sailed; nevertheless, tell Autonoe and Hippodamia that I want them.
They must be with me when I am in the cloister; I am not going among the men alone; it would not be proper for me to do so.” On this the old woman150 went out of the room to bid the maids go to their mistress.
In the meantime Minerva bethought her of another matter, and sent Penelope off into a sweet slumber; so she lay down on her couch and her limbs became heavy with sleep.
Then the goddess shed grace and beauty over her that all the Achaeans might admire her.
She washed her face with the ambrosial loveliness that Venus wears when she goes dancing with the Graces; she made her taller and of a more commanding figure, while as for her complexion it was whiter than sawn ivory.
When Minerva had done all this she went away, whereon the maids came in from the women’s room and woke Penelope with the sound of their talking.
“What an exquisitely delicious sleep I have been having,” said she, as she passed her hands over her face, “in spite of all my misery.
I wish Diana would let me die so sweetly now at this very moment, that I might no longer waste in despair for the loss of my dear husband, who possessed every kind of good quality and was the most distinguished man among the Achaeans.” With these words she came down from her upper room, not alone but attended by two of her maidens, and when she reached the suitors she stood by one of the bearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloister, holding a veil before her face, and with a staid maid servant on either side of her.
As they beheld her the suitors were so overpowered and became so desperately enamoured of her, that each one prayed he might win her for his own bed fellow.
“Telemachus,” said she, addressing her son, “I fear you are no longer so discreet and well conducted as you used to be.
When you were younger you had a greater sense of propriety; now, however, that you are grown up, though a stranger to look at you would take you for the son of a well to do father as far as size and good looks go, your conduct is by no means what it should be.
What is all this disturbance that has been going on, and how came you to allow a stranger to be so disgracefully ill-treated?
What would have happened if he had suffered serious injury while a suppliant in our house?
Surely this would have been very discreditable to you.” “I am not surprised, my dear mother, at your displeasure,” replied Telemachus, “I understand all about it and know when things are not as they should be, which I could not do when I was younger; I cannot, however, behave with perfect propriety at all times.
First one and then another of these wicked people here keeps driving me out of my mind, and I have no one to stand by me.
After all, however, this fight between Irus and the stranger did not turn out as the suitors meant it to do, for the stranger got the best of it.
I wish Father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo would break the neck of every one of these wooers of yours, some inside the house and some out; and I wish they might all be as limp as Irus is over yonder in the gate of the outer court.
See how he nods his head like a drunken man; he has had such a thrashing that he cannot stand on his feet nor get back to his home, wherever that may be, for he has no strength left in him.” Thus did they converse.
Eurymachus then came up and said, “Queen Penelope, daughter of Icarius, if all the Achaeans in Iasian Argos could see you at this moment, you would have still more suitors in your house by tomorrow morning, for you are the most admirable woman in the whole world both as regards personal beauty and strength of understanding.” To this Penelope replied, “Eurymachus, heaven robbed me of all my beauty whether of face or figure when the Argives set sail for Troy and my dear husband with them.
If he were to return and look after my affairs, I should both be more respected and show a better presence to the world.
As it is, I am oppressed with care, and with the afflictions which heaven has seen fit to heap upon me.
My husband foresaw it all, and when he was leaving home he took my right wrist in his hand—‘Wife,’ he said, ‘we shall not all of us come safe home from Troy, for the Trojans fight well both with bow and spear.
They are excellent also at fighting from chariots, and nothing decides the issue of a fight sooner than this.
I know not, therefore, whether heaven will send me back to you, or whether I may not fall over there at Troy.
In the meantime do you look after things here.
Take care of my father and mother as at present, and even more so during my absence, but when you see our son growing a beard, then marry whom you will, and leave this your present home.’ This is what he said and now it is all coming true.
A night will come when I shall have to yield myself to a marriage which I detest, for Jove has taken from me all hope of happiness.
This further grief, moreover, cuts me to the very heart.
You suitors are not wooing me after the custom of my country.
When men are courting a woman who they think will be a good wife to them and who is of noble birth, and when they are each trying to win her for himself, they usually bring oxen and sheep to feast the friends of the lady, and they make her magnificent presents, instead of eating up other people’s property without paying for it.” This was what she said, and Ulysses was glad when he heard her trying to get presents out of the suitors, and flattering them with fair words which he knew she did not mean.
Then Antinous said, “Queen Penelope, daughter of Icarius, take as many presents as you please from any one who will give them to you; it is not well to refuse a present; but we will not go about our business nor stir from where we are, till you have married the best man among us whoever he may be.” The others applauded what Antinous had said, and each one sent his servant to bring his present.
Antinous’s man returned with a large and lovely dress most exquisitely embroidered.
It had twelve beautifully made brooch pins of pure gold with which to fasten it.
Eurymachus immediately brought her a magnificent chain of gold and amber beads that gleamed like sunlight.
Eurydamas’s two men returned with some earrings fashioned into three brilliant pendants which glistened most beautifully; while king Pisander son of Polyctor gave her a necklace of the rarest workmanship, and every one else brought her a beautiful present of some kind.
Then the queen went back to her room upstairs, and her maids brought the presents after her.
Meanwhile the suitors took to singing and dancing, and stayed till evening came.
They danced and sang till it grew dark; they then brought in three braziers151 to give light, and piled them up with chopped firewood very old and dry, and they lit torches from them, which the maids held up turn and turn about.
Then Ulysses said: “Maids, servants of Ulysses who has so long been absent, go to the queen inside the house; sit with her and amuse her, or spin, and pick wool.
I will hold the light for all these people.
They may stay till morning, but shall not beat me, for I can stand a great deal.” The maids looked at one another and laughed, while pretty Melantho began to gibe at him contemptuously.
She was daughter to Dolius, but had been brought up by Penelope, who used to give her toys to play with, and looked after her when she was a child; but in spite of all this she showed no consideration for the sorrows of her mistress, and used to misconduct herself with Eurymachus, with whom she was in love.
“Poor wretch,” said she, “are you gone clean out of your mind?
Go and sleep in some smithy, or place of public gossips, instead of chattering here.
Are you not ashamed of opening your mouth before your betters—so many of them too?
Has the wine been getting into your head, or do you always babble in this way?
You seem to have lost your wits because you beat the tramp Irus; take care that a better man than he does not come and cudgel you about the head till he pack you bleeding out of the house.” “Vixen,” replied Ulysses, scowling at her, “I will go and tell Telemachus what you have been saying, and he will have you torn limb from limb.” With these words he scared the women, and they went off into the body of the house.
They trembled all over, for they thought he would do as he said.
But Ulysses took his stand near the burning braziers, holding up torches and looking at the people—brooding the while on things that should surely come to pass.
But Minerva would not let the suitors for one moment cease their insolence, for she wanted Ulysses to become even more bitter against them; she therefore set Eurymachus son of Polybus on to gibe at him, which made the others laugh.
“Listen to me,” said he, “you suitors of Queen Penelope, that I may speak even as I am minded.
It is not for nothing that this man has come to the house of Ulysses; I believe the light has not been coming from the torches, but from his own head—for his hair is all gone, every bit of it.” Then turning to Ulysses he said, “Stranger, will you work as a servant, if I send you to the wolds and see that you are well paid?
Can you build a stone fence, or plant trees?
I will have you fed all the year round, and will find you in shoes and clothing.
Will you go, then?
Not you; for you have got into bad ways, and do not want to work; you had rather fill your belly by going round the country begging.” “Eurymachus,” answered Ulysses, “if you and I were to work one against the other in early summer when the days are at their longest—give me a good scythe, and take another yourself, and let us see which will last the longer or mow the stronger, from dawn till dark when the mowing grass is about.
Or if you will plough against me, let us each take a yoke of tawny oxen, well-mated and of great strength and endurance: turn me into a four acre field, and see whether you or I can drive the straighter furrow.
If, again, war were to break out this day, give me a shield, a couple of spears and a helmet fitting well upon my temples—you would find me foremost in the fray, and would cease your gibes about my belly.
You are insolent and cruel, and think yourself a great man because you live in a little world, and that a bad one.
If Ulysses comes to his own again, the doors of his house are wide, but you will find them narrow when you try to fly through them.” Eurymachus was furious at all this.
He scowled at him and cried, “You wretch, I will soon pay you out for daring to say such things to me, and in public too.
Has the wine been getting into your head or do you always babble in this way?
You seem to have lost your wits because you beat the tramp Irus.” With this he caught hold of a footstool, but Ulysses sought protection at the knees of Amphinomus of Dulichium, for he was afraid.
The stool hit the cupbearer on his right hand and knocked him down: the man fell with a cry flat on his back, and his wine-jug fell ringing to the ground.
The suitors in the covered cloister were now in an uproar, and one would turn towards his neighbour, saying, “I wish the stranger had gone somewhere else, bad luck to him, for all the trouble he gives us.
We cannot permit such disturbance about a beggar; if such ill counsels are to prevail we shall have no more pleasure at our banquet.” On this Telemachus came forward and said, “Sirs, are you mad?
Can you not carry your meat and your liquor decently?
Some evil spirit has possessed you.
I do not wish to drive any of you away, but you have had your suppers, and the sooner you all go home to bed the better.” The suitors bit their lips and marvelled at the boldness of his speech; but Amphinomus the son of Nisus, who was son to Aretias, said, “Do not let us take offence; it is reasonable, so let us make no answer.
Neither let us do violence to the stranger nor to any of Ulysses’ servants.
Let the cupbearer go round with the drink-offerings, that we may make them and go home to our rest.
As for the stranger, let us leave Telemachus to deal with him, for it is to his house that he has come.” Thus did he speak, and his saying pleased them well, so Mulius of Dulichium, servant to Amphinomus, mixed them a bowl of wine and water and handed it round to each of them man by man, whereon they made their drink-offerings to the blessed gods: Then, when they had made their drink-offerings and had drunk each one as he was minded, they took their several ways each of them to his own abode.
BOOK XIX TELEMACHUS AND ULYSSES REMOVE THE ARMOUR—ULYSSES INTERVIEWS PENELOPE—EURYCLEA WASHES HIS FEET AND RECOGNISES THE SCAR ON HIS LEG—PENELOPE TELLS HER DREAM TO ULYSSES.
Ulysses was left in the cloister, pondering on the means whereby with Minerva’s help he might be able to kill the suitors.
Presently he said to Telemachus, “Telemachus, we must get the armour together and take it down inside.
Make some excuse when the suitors ask you why you have removed it.
Say that you have taken it to be out of the way of the smoke, inasmuch as it is no longer what it was when Ulysses went away, but has become soiled and begrimed with soot.
Add to this more particularly that you are afraid Jove may set them on to quarrel over their wine, and that they may do each other some harm which may disgrace both banquet and wooing, for the sight of arms sometimes tempts people to use them.” Telemachus approved of what his father had said, so he called nurse Euryclea and said, “Nurse, shut the women up in their room, while I take the armour that my father left behind him down into the store room.
No one looks after it now my father is gone, and it has got all smirched with soot during my own boyhood.
I want to take it down where the smoke cannot reach it.” “I wish, child,” answered Euryclea, “that you would take the management of the house into your own hands altogether, and look after all the property yourself.
But who is to go with you and light you to the store-room?
The maids would have done so, but you would not let them.” “The stranger,” said Telemachus, “shall show me a light; when people eat my bread they must earn it, no matter where they come from.” Euryclea did as she was told, and bolted the women inside their room.
Then Ulysses and his son made all haste to take the helmets, shields, and spears inside; and Minerva went before them with a gold lamp in her hand that shed a soft and brilliant radiance, whereon Telemachus said, “Father, my eyes behold a great marvel: the walls, with the rafters, crossbeams, and the supports on which they rest are all aglow as with a flaming fire.
Surely there is some god here who has come down from heaven.” “Hush,” answered Ulysses, “hold your peace and ask no questions, for this is the manner of the gods.
Get you to your bed, and leave me here to talk with your mother and the maids.
Your mother in her grief will ask me all sorts of questions.” On this Telemachus went by torch-light to the other side of the inner court, to the room in which he always slept.
There he lay in his bed till morning, while Ulysses was left in the cloister pondering on the means whereby with Minerva’s help he might be able to kill the suitors.
Then Penelope came down from her room looking like Venus or Diana, and they set her a seat inlaid with scrolls of silver and ivory near the fire in her accustomed place.
It had been made by Icmalius and had a footstool all in one piece with the seat itself; and it was covered with a thick fleece: on this she now sat, and the maids came from the women’s room to join her.
They set about removing the tables at which the wicked suitors had been dining, and took away the bread that was left, with the cups from which they had drunk.
They emptied the embers out of the braziers, and heaped much wood upon them to give both light and heat; but Melantho began to rail at Ulysses a second time and said, “Stranger, do you mean to plague us by hanging about the house all night and spying upon the women?
Be off, you wretch, outside, and eat your supper there, or you shall be driven out with a firebrand.” Ulysses scowled at her and answered, “My good woman, why should you be so angry with me?
Is it because I am not clean, and my clothes are all in rags, and because I am obliged to go begging about after the manner of tramps and beggars generally?
I too was a rich man once, and had a fine house of my own; in those days I gave to many a tramp such as I now am, no matter who he might be nor what he wanted.
I had any number of servants, and all the other things which people have who live well and are accounted wealthy, but it pleased Jove to take all away from me; therefore, woman, beware lest you too come to lose that pride and place in which you now wanton above your fellows; have a care lest you get out of favour with your mistress, and lest Ulysses should come home, for there is still a chance that he may do so.
Moreover, though he be dead as you think he is, yet by Apollo’s will he has left a son behind him, Telemachus, who will note anything done amiss by the maids in the house, for he is now no longer in his boyhood.” Penelope heard what he was saying and scolded the maid, “Impudent baggage,” said she, “I see how abominably you are behaving, and you shall smart for it.
You knew perfectly well, for I told you myself, that I was going to see the stranger and ask him about my husband, for whose sake I am in such continual sorrow.” Then she said to her head waiting woman Eurynome, “Bring a seat with a fleece upon it, for the stranger to sit upon while he tells his story, and listens to what I have to say.
I wish to ask him some questions.” Eurynome brought the seat at once and set a fleece upon it, and as soon as Ulysses had sat down Penelope began by saying, “Stranger, I shall first ask you who and whence are you?
Tell me of your town and parents.” “Madam,” answered Ulysses, “who on the face of the whole earth can dare to chide with you?
Your fame reaches the firmament of heaven itself; you are like some blameless king, who upholds righteousness, as the monarch over a great and valiant nation: the earth yields its wheat and barley, the trees are loaded with fruit, the ewes bring forth lambs, and the sea abounds with fish by reason of his virtues, and his people do good deeds under him.
Nevertheless, as I sit here in your house, ask me some other question and do not seek to know my race and family, or you will recall memories that will yet more increase my sorrow.
I am full of heaviness, but I ought not to sit weeping and wailing in another person’s house, nor is it well to be thus grieving continually.
I shall have one of the servants or even yourself complaining of me, and saying that my eyes swim with tears because I am heavy with wine.” Then Penelope answered, “Stranger, heaven robbed me of all beauty, whether of face or figure, when the Argives set sail for Troy and my dear husband with them.
If he were to return and look after my affairs I should be both more respected and should show a better presence to the world.
As it is, I am oppressed with care, and with the afflictions which heaven has seen fit to heap upon me.
The chiefs from all our islands—Dulichium, Same, and Zacynthus, as also from Ithaca itself, are wooing me against my will and are wasting my estate.
I can therefore show no attention to strangers, nor suppliants, nor to people who say that they are skilled artisans, but am all the time broken-hearted about Ulysses.
They want me to marry again at once, and I have to invent stratagems in order to deceive them.
In the first place heaven put it in my mind to set up a great tambour-frame in my room, and to begin working upon an enormous piece of fine needlework.
Then I said to them, ‘Sweethearts, Ulysses is indeed dead, still, do not press me to marry again immediately; wait—for I would not have my skill in needlework perish unrecorded—till I have finished making a pall for the hero Laertes, to be ready against the time when death shall take him.
He is very rich, and the women of the place will talk if he is laid out without a pall.’ This was what I said, and they assented; whereon I used to keep working at my great web all day long, but at night I would unpick the stitches again by torch light.
I fooled them in this way for three years without their finding it out, but as time wore on and I was now in my fourth year, in the waning of moons, and many days had been accomplished, those good for nothing hussies my maids betrayed me to the suitors, who broke in upon me and caught me; they were very angry with me, so I was forced to finish my work whether I would or no.
And now I do not see how I can find any further shift for getting out of this marriage.
My parents are putting great pressure upon me, and my son chafes at the ravages the suitors are making upon his estate, for he is now old enough to understand all about it and is perfectly able to look after his own affairs, for heaven has blessed him with an excellent disposition.
Still, notwithstanding all this, tell me who you are and where you come from—for you must have had father and mother of some sort; you cannot be the son of an oak or of a rock.” Then Ulysses answered, “Madam, wife of Ulysses, since you persist in asking me about my family, I will answer, no matter what it costs me: people must expect to be pained when they have been exiles as long as I have, and suffered as much among as many peoples.
Nevertheless, as regards your question I will tell you all you ask.
There is a fair and fruitful island in mid-ocean called Crete; it is thickly peopled and there are ninety cities in it: the people speak many different languages which overlap one another, for there are Achaeans, brave Eteocretans, Dorians of three-fold race, and noble Pelasgi.
There is a great town there, Cnossus, where Minos reigned who every nine years had a conference with Jove himself.152 Minos was father to Deucalion, whose son I am, for Deucalion had two sons Idomeneus and myself.
Idomeneus sailed for Troy, and I, who am the younger, am called Aethon; my brother, however, was at once the older and the more valiant of the two; hence it was in Crete that I saw Ulysses and showed him hospitality, for the winds took him there as he was on his way to Troy, carrying him out of his course from cape Malea and leaving him in Amnisus off the cave of Ilithuia, where the harbours are difficult to enter and he could hardly find shelter from the winds that were then raging.
As soon as he got there he went into the town and asked for Idomeneus, claiming to be his old and valued friend, but Idomeneus had already set sail for Troy some ten or twelve days earlier, so I took him to my own house and showed him every kind of hospitality, for I had abundance of everything.
Moreover, I fed the men who were with him with barley meal from the public store, and got subscriptions of wine and oxen for them to sacrifice to their heart’s content.
They stayed with me twelve days, for there was a gale blowing from the North so strong that one could hardly keep one’s feet on land.
I suppose some unfriendly god had raised it for them, but on the thirteenth day the wind dropped, and they got away.” Many a plausible tale did Ulysses further tell her, and Penelope wept as she listened, for her heart was melted.
As the snow wastes upon the mountain tops when the winds from South East and West have breathed upon it and thawed it till the rivers run bank full with water, even so did her cheeks overflow with tears for the husband who was all the time sitting by her side.
Ulysses felt for her and was sorry for her, but he kept his eyes as hard as horn or iron without letting them so much as quiver, so cunningly did he restrain his tears.
Then, when she had relieved herself by weeping, she turned to him again and said: “Now, stranger, I shall put you to the test and see whether or no you really did entertain my husband and his men, as you say you did.
Tell me, then, how he was dressed, what kind of a man he was to look at, and so also with his companions.” “Madam,” answered Ulysses, “it is such a long time ago that I can hardly say.
Twenty years are come and gone since he left my home, and went elsewhither; but I will tell you as well as I can recollect.
Ulysses wore a mantle of purple wool, double lined, and it was fastened by a gold brooch with two catches for the pin.
On the face of this there was a device that shewed a dog holding a spotted fawn between his fore paws, and watching it as it lay panting upon the ground.
Every one marvelled at the way in which these things had been done in gold, the dog looking at the fawn, and strangling it, while the fawn was struggling convulsively to escape.153 As for the shirt that he wore next his skin, it was so soft that it fitted him like the skin of an onion, and glistened in the sunlight to the admiration of all the women who beheld it.
Furthermore I say, and lay my saying to your heart, that I do not know whether Ulysses wore these clothes when he left home, or whether one of his companions had given them to him while he was on his voyage; or possibly some one at whose house he was staying made him a present of them, for he was a man of many friends and had few equals among the Achaeans.
I myself gave him a sword of bronze and a beautiful purple mantle, double lined, with a shirt that went down to his feet, and I sent him on board his ship with every mark of honour.
He had a servant with him, a little older than himself, and I can tell you what he was like; his shoulders were hunched,154 he was dark, and he had thick curly hair.
His name was Eurybates, and Ulysses treated him with greater familiarity than he did any of the others, as being the most like-minded with himself.” Penelope was moved still more deeply as she heard the indisputable proofs that Ulysses laid before her; and when she had again found relief in tears she said to him, “Stranger, I was already disposed to pity you, but henceforth you shall be honoured and made welcome in my house.
It was I who gave Ulysses the clothes you speak of.
I took them out of the store room and folded them up myself, and I gave him also the gold brooch to wear as an ornament.
Alas!
I shall never welcome him home again.
It was by an ill fate that he ever set out for that detested city whose very name I cannot bring myself even to mention.” Then Ulysses answered, “Madam, wife of Ulysses, do not disfigure yourself further by grieving thus bitterly for your loss, though I can hardly blame you for doing so.
A woman who has loved her husband and borne him children, would naturally be grieved at losing him, even though he were a worse man than Ulysses, who they say was like a god.
Still, cease your tears and listen to what I can tell you.
I will hide nothing from you, and can say with perfect truth that I have lately heard of Ulysses as being alive and on his way home; he is among the Thesprotians, and is bringing back much valuable treasure that he has begged from one and another of them; but his ship and all his crew were lost as they were leaving the Thrinacian island, for Jove and the sun-god were angry with him because his men had slaughtered the sun-god’s cattle, and they were all drowned to a man.
But Ulysses stuck to the keel of the ship and was drifted on to the land of the Phaeacians, who are near of kin to the immortals, and who treated him as though he had been a god, giving him many presents, and wishing to escort him home safe and sound.
In fact Ulysses would have been here long ago, had he not thought better to go from land to land gathering wealth; for there is no man living who is so wily as he is; there is no one can compare with him.
Pheidon king of the Thesprotians told me all this, and he swore to me—making drink-offerings in his house as he did so—that the ship was by the water side and the crew found who would take Ulysses to his own country.
He sent me off first, for there happened to be a Thesprotian ship sailing for the wheat-growing island of Dulichium, but he showed me all the treasure Ulysses had got together, and he had enough lying in the house of king Pheidon to keep his family for ten generations; but the king said Ulysses had gone to Dodona that he might learn Jove’s mind from the high oak tree, and know whether after so long an absence he should return to Ithaca openly or in secret.
So you may know he is safe and will be here shortly; he is close at hand and cannot remain away from home much longer; nevertheless I will confirm my words with an oath, and call Jove who is the first and mightiest of all gods to witness, as also that hearth of Ulysses to which I have now come, that all I have spoken shall surely come to pass.
Ulysses will return in this self same year; with the end of this moon and the beginning of the next he will be here.” “May it be even so,” answered Penelope; “if your words come true you shall have such gifts and such good will from me that all who see you shall congratulate you; but I know very well how it will be.
Ulysses will not return, neither will you get your escort hence, for so surely as that Ulysses ever was, there are now no longer any such masters in the house as he was, to receive honourable strangers or to further them on their way home.
And now, you maids, wash his feet for him, and make him a bed on a couch with rugs and blankets, that he may be warm and quiet till morning.
Then, at day break wash him and anoint him again, that he may sit in the cloister and take his meals with Telemachus.
It shall be the worse for any one of these hateful people who is uncivil to him; like it or not, he shall have no more to do in this house.
For how, sir, shall you be able to learn whether or no I am superior to others of my sex both in goodness of heart and understanding, if I let you dine in my cloisters squalid and ill clad?
Men live but for a little season; if they are hard, and deal hardly, people wish them ill so long as they are alive, and speak contemptuously of them when they are dead, but he that is righteous and deals righteously, the people tell of his praise among all lands, and many shall call him blessed.” Ulysses answered, “Madam, I have foresworn rugs and blankets from the day that I left the snowy ranges of Crete to go on shipboard.
I will lie as I have lain on many a sleepless night hitherto.
Night after night have I passed in any rough sleeping place, and waited for morning.
Nor, again, do I like having my feet washed; I shall not let any of the young hussies about your house touch my feet; but, if you have any old and respectable woman who has gone through as much trouble as I have, I will allow her to wash them.” To this Penelope said, “My dear sir, of all the guests who ever yet came to my house there never was one who spoke in all things with such admirable propriety as you do.
There happens to be in the house a most respectable old woman—the same who received my poor dear husband in her arms the night he was born, and nursed him in infancy.
She is very feeble now, but she shall wash your feet.” “Come here,” said she, “Euryclea, and wash your master’s age-mate; I suppose Ulysses’ hands and feet are very much the same now as his are, for trouble ages all of us dreadfully fast.” On these words the old woman covered her face with her hands; she began to weep and made lamentation saying, “My dear child, I cannot think whatever I am to do with you.
I am certain no one was ever more god-fearing than yourself, and yet Jove hates you.
No one in the whole world ever burned him more thigh bones, nor gave him finer hecatombs when you prayed you might come to a green old age yourself and see your son grow up to take after you: yet see how he has prevented you alone from ever getting back to your own home.
I have no doubt the women in some foreign palace which Ulysses has got to are gibing at him as all these sluts here have been gibing at you.
I do not wonder at your not choosing to let them wash you after the manner in which they have insulted you; I will wash your feet myself gladly enough, as Penelope has said that I am to do so; I will wash them both for Penelope’s sake and for your own, for you have raised the most lively feelings of compassion in my mind; and let me say this moreover, which pray attend to; we have had all kinds of strangers in distress come here before now, but I make bold to say that no one ever yet came who was so like Ulysses in figure, voice, and feet as you are.” “Those who have seen us both,” answered Ulysses, “have always said we were wonderfully like each other, and now you have noticed it too.” Then the old woman took the cauldron in which she was going to wash his feet, and poured plenty of cold water into it, adding hot till the bath was warm enough.
Ulysses sat by the fire, but ere long he turned away from the light, for it occurred to him that when the old woman had hold of his leg she would recognise a certain scar which it bore, whereon the whole truth would come out.
And indeed as soon as she began washing her master, she at once knew the scar as one that had been given him by a wild boar when he was hunting on Mt.
Parnassus with his excellent grandfather Autolycus—who was the most accomplished thief and perjurer in the whole world—and with the sons of Autolycus.
Mercury himself had endowed him with this gift, for he used to burn the thigh bones of goats and kids to him, so he took pleasure in his companionship.
It happened once that Autolycus had gone to Ithaca and had found the child of his daughter just born.
As soon as he had done supper Euryclea set the infant upon his knees and said, “Autolycus, you must find a name for your grandson; you greatly wished that you might have one.” “Son-in-law and daughter,” replied Autolycus, “call the child thus: I am highly displeased with a large number of people in one place and another, both men and women; so name the child ‘Ulysses,’ or the child of anger.
When he grows up and comes to visit his mother’s family on Mt.
Parnassus, where my possessions lie, I will make him a present and will send him on his way rejoicing.” Ulysses, therefore, went to Parnassus to get the presents from Autolycus, who with his sons shook hands with him and gave him welcome.
His grandmother Amphithea threw her arms about him, and kissed his head, and both his beautiful eyes, while Autolycus desired his sons to get dinner ready, and they did as he told them.
They brought in a five year old bull, flayed it, made it ready and divided it into joints; these they then cut carefully up into smaller pieces and spitted them; they roasted them sufficiently and served the portions round.
Thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun they feasted, and every man had his full share so that all were satisfied; but when the sun set and it came on dark, they went to bed and enjoyed the boon of sleep.
When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, the sons of Autolycus went out with their hounds hunting, and Ulysses went too.
They climbed the wooded slopes of Parnassus and soon reached its breezy upland valleys; but as the sun was beginning to beat upon the fields, fresh-risen from the slow still currents of Oceanus, they came to a mountain dell.
The dogs were in front searching for the tracks of the beast they were chasing, and after them came the sons of Autolycus, among whom was Ulysses, close behind the dogs, and he had a long spear in his hand.
Here was the lair of a huge boar among some thick brushwood, so dense that the wind and rain could not get through it, nor could the sun’s rays pierce it, and the ground underneath lay thick with fallen leaves.
The boar heard the noise of the men’s feet, and the hounds baying on every side as the huntsmen came up to him, so he rushed from his lair, raised the bristles on his neck, and stood at bay with fire flashing from his eyes.
Ulysses was the first to raise his spear and try to drive it into the brute, but the boar was too quick for him, and charged him sideways, ripping him above the knee with a gash that tore deep though it did not reach the bone.
As for the boar, Ulysses hit him on the right shoulder, and the point of the spear went right through him, so that he fell groaning in the dust until the life went out of him.
The sons of Autolycus busied themselves with the carcass of the boar, and bound Ulysses’ wound; then, after saying a spell to stop the bleeding, they went home as fast as they could.
But when Autolycus and his sons had thoroughly healed Ulysses, they made him some splendid presents, and sent him back to Ithaca with much mutual good will.
When he got back, his father and mother were rejoiced to see him, and asked him all about it, and how he had hurt himself to get the scar; so he told them how the boar had ripped him when he was out hunting with Autolycus and his sons on Mt.
Parnassus.
As soon as Euryclea had got the scarred limb in her hands and had well hold of it, she recognised it and dropped the foot at once.
The leg fell into the bath, which rang out and was overturned, so that all the water was spilt on the ground; Euryclea’s eyes between her joy and her grief filled with tears, and she could not speak, but she caught Ulysses by the beard and said, “My dear child, I am sure you must be Ulysses himself, only I did not know you till I had actually touched and handled you.” As she spoke she looked towards Penelope, as though wanting to tell her that her dear husband was in the house, but Penelope was unable to look in that direction and observe what was going on, for Minerva had diverted her attention; so Ulysses caught Euryclea by the throat with his right hand and with his left drew her close to him, and said, “Nurse, do you wish to be the ruin of me, you who nursed me at your own breast, now that after twenty years of wandering I am at last come to my own home again?
Since it has been borne in upon you by heaven to recognise me, hold your tongue, and do not say a word about it to any one else in the house, for if you do I tell you—and it shall surely be—that if heaven grants me to take the lives of these suitors, I will not spare you, though you are my own nurse, when I am killing the other women.” “My child,” answered Euryclea, “what are you talking about?
You know very well that nothing can either bend or break me.
I will hold my tongue like a stone or a piece of iron; furthermore let me say, and lay my saying to your heart, when heaven has delivered the suitors into your hand, I will give you a list of the women in the house who have been ill-behaved, and of those who are guiltless.” And Ulysses answered, “Nurse, you ought not to speak in that way; I am well able to form my own opinion about one and all of them; hold your tongue and leave everything to heaven.” As he said this Euryclea left the cloister to fetch some more water, for the first had been all spilt; and when she had washed him and anointed him with oil, Ulysses drew his seat nearer to the fire to warm himself, and hid the scar under his rags.
Then Penelope began talking to him and said: “Stranger, I should like to speak with you briefly about another matter.
It is indeed nearly bed time—for those, at least, who can sleep in spite of sorrow.
As for myself, heaven has given me a life of such unmeasurable woe, that even by day when I am attending to my duties and looking after the servants, I am still weeping and lamenting during the whole time; then, when night comes, and we all of us go to bed, I lie awake thinking, and my heart becomes a prey to the most incessant and cruel tortures.
As the dun nightingale, daughter of Pandareus, sings in the early spring from her seat in shadiest covert hid, and with many a plaintive trill pours out the tale how by mishap she killed her own child Itylus, son of king Zethus, even so does my mind toss and turn in its uncertainty whether I ought to stay with my son here, and safeguard my substance, my bondsmen, and the greatness of my house, out of regard to public opinion and the memory of my late husband, or whether it is not now time for me to go with the best of these suitors who are wooing me and making me such magnificent presents.
As long as my son was still young, and unable to understand, he would not hear of my leaving my husband’s house, but now that he is full grown he begs and prays me to do so, being incensed at the way in which the suitors are eating up his property.
Listen, then, to a dream that I have had and interpret it for me if you can.
I have twenty geese about the house that eat mash out of a trough,155 and of which I am exceedingly fond.
I dreamed that a great eagle came swooping down from a mountain, and dug his curved beak into the neck of each of them till he had killed them all.
Presently he soared off into the sky, and left them lying dead about the yard; whereon I wept in my dream till all my maids gathered round me, so piteously was I grieving because the eagle had killed my geese.
Then he came back again, and perching on a projecting rafter spoke to me with human voice, and told me to leave off crying.
‘Be of good courage,’ he said, ‘daughter of Icarius; this is no dream, but a vision of good omen that shall surely come to pass.
The geese are the suitors, and I am no longer an eagle, but your own husband, who am come back to you, and who will bring these suitors to a disgraceful end.’ On this I woke, and when I looked out I saw my geese at the trough eating their mash as usual.” “This dream, Madam,” replied Ulysses, “can admit but of one interpretation, for had not Ulysses himself told you how it shall be fulfilled?
The death of the suitors is portended, and not one single one of them will escape.” And Penelope answered, “Stranger, dreams are very curious and unaccountable things, and they do not by any means invariably come true.
There are two gates through which these unsubstantial fancies proceed; the one is of horn, and the other ivory.
Those that come through the gate of ivory are fatuous, but those from the gate of horn mean something to those that see them.
I do not think, however, that my own dream came through the gate of horn, though I and my son should be most thankful if it proves to have done so.
Furthermore I say—and lay my saying to your heart—the coming dawn will usher in the ill-omened day that is to sever me from the house of Ulysses, for I am about to hold a tournament of axes.
My husband used to set up twelve axes in the court, one in front of the other, like the stays upon which a ship is built; he would then go back from them and shoot an arrow through the whole twelve.
I shall make the suitors try to do the same thing, and whichever of them can string the bow most easily, and send his arrow through all the twelve axes, him will I follow, and quit this house of my lawful husband, so goodly and so abounding in wealth.
But even so, I doubt not that I shall remember it in my dreams.” Then Ulysses answered, “Madam, wife of Ulysses, you need not defer your tournament, for Ulysses will return ere ever they can string the bow, handle it how they will, and send their arrows through the iron.” To this Penelope said, “As long, sir, as you will sit here and talk to me, I can have no desire to go to bed.
Still, people cannot do permanently without sleep, and heaven has appointed us dwellers on earth a time for all things.
I will therefore go upstairs and recline upon that couch which I have never ceased to flood with my tears from the day Ulysses set out for the city with a hateful name.” She then went upstairs to her own room, not alone, but attended by her maidens, and when there, she lamented her dear husband till Minerva shed sweet sleep over her eyelids.
BOOK XX ULYSSES CANNOT SLEEP—PENELOPE’S PRAYER TO DIANA—THE TWO SIGNS FROM HEAVEN—EUMAEUS AND PHILOETIUS ARRIVE—THE SUITORS DINE—CTESIPPUS THROWS AN OX’S FOOT AT ULYSSES—THEOCLYMENUS FORETELLS DISASTER AND LEAVES THE HOUSE.
Ulysses slept in the cloister upon an undressed bullock’s hide, on the top of which he threw several skins of the sheep the suitors had eaten, and Eurynome156 threw a cloak over him after he had laid himself down.
There, then, Ulysses lay wakefully brooding upon the way in which he should kill the suitors; and by and by, the women who had been in the habit of misconducting themselves with them, left the house giggling and laughing with one another.
This made Ulysses very angry, and he doubted whether to get up and kill every single one of them then and there, or to let them sleep one more and last time with the suitors.
His heart growled within him, and as a bitch with puppies growls and shows her teeth when she sees a stranger, so did his heart growl with anger at the evil deeds that were being done: but he beat his breast and said, “Heart, be still, you had worse than this to bear on the day when the terrible Cyclops ate your brave companions; yet you bore it in silence till your cunning got you safe out of the cave, though you made sure of being killed.” Thus he chided with his heart, and checked it into endurance, but he tossed about as one who turns a paunch full of blood and fat in front of a hot fire, doing it first on one side and then on the other, that he may get it cooked as soon as possible, even so did he turn himself about from side to side, thinking all the time how, single handed as he was, he should contrive to kill so large a body of men as the wicked suitors.
But by and by Minerva came down from heaven in the likeness of a woman, and hovered over his head saying, “My poor unhappy man, why do you lie awake in this way?
This is your house: your wife is safe inside it, and so is your son who is just such a young man as any father may be proud of.” “Goddess,” answered Ulysses, “all that you have said is true, but I am in some doubt as to how I shall be able to kill these wicked suitors single handed, seeing what a number of them there always are.
And there is this further difficulty, which is still more considerable.
Supposing that with Jove’s and your assistance I succeed in killing them, I must ask you to consider where I am to escape to from their avengers when it is all over.” “For shame,” replied Minerva, “why, any one else would trust a worse ally than myself, even though that ally were only a mortal and less wise than I am.
Am I not a goddess, and have I not protected you throughout in all your troubles?
I tell you plainly that even though there were fifty bands of men surrounding us and eager to kill us, you should take all their sheep and cattle, and drive them away with you.
But go to sleep; it is a very bad thing to lie awake all night, and you shall be out of your troubles before long.” As she spoke she shed sleep over his eyes, and then went back to Olympus.
While Ulysses was thus yielding himself to a very deep slumber that eased the burden of his sorrows, his admirable wife awoke, and sitting up in her bed began to cry.
When she had relieved herself by weeping she prayed to Diana saying, “Great Goddess Diana, daughter of Jove, drive an arrow into my heart and slay me; or let some whirlwind snatch me up and bear me through paths of darkness till it drop me into the mouths of over-flowing Oceanus, as it did the daughters of Pandareus.
The daughters of Pandareus lost their father and mother, for the gods killed them, so they were left orphans.
But Venus took care of them, and fed them on cheese, honey, and sweet wine.
Juno taught them to excel all women in beauty of form and understanding; Diana gave them an imposing presence, and Minerva endowed them with every kind of accomplishment; but one day when Venus had gone up to Olympus to see Jove about getting them married (for well does he know both what shall happen and what not happen to every one) the storm winds came and spirited them away to become handmaids to the dread Erinyes.
Even so I wish that the gods who live in heaven would hide me from mortal sight, or that fair Diana might strike me, for I would fain go even beneath the sad earth if I might do so still looking towards Ulysses only, and without having to yield myself to a worse man than he was.
Besides, no matter how much people may grieve by day, they can put up with it so long as they can sleep at night, for when the eyes are closed in slumber people forget good and ill alike; whereas my misery haunts me even in my dreams.
This very night methought there was one lying by my side who was like Ulysses as he was when he went away with his host, and I rejoiced, for I believed that it was no dream, but the very truth itself.” On this the day broke, but Ulysses heard the sound of her weeping, and it puzzled him, for it seemed as though she already knew him and was by his side.
Then he gathered up the cloak and the fleeces on which he had lain, and set them on a seat in the cloister, but he took the bullock’s hide out into the open.
He lifted up his hands to heaven, and prayed, saying “Father Jove, since you have seen fit to bring me over land and sea to my own home after all the afflictions you have laid upon me, give me a sign out of the mouth of some one or other of those who are now waking within the house, and let me have another sign of some kind from outside.” Thus did he pray.
Jove heard his prayer and forthwith thundered high up among the clouds from the splendour of Olympus, and Ulysses was glad when he heard it.
At the same time within the house, a miller-woman from hard by in the mill room lifted up her voice and gave him another sign.
There were twelve miller-women whose business it was to grind wheat and barley which are the staff of life.
The others had ground their task and had gone to take their rest, but this one had not yet finished, for she was not so strong as they were, and when she heard the thunder she stopped grinding and gave the sign to her master.
“Father Jove,” said she, “you, who rule over heaven and earth, you have thundered from a clear sky without so much as a cloud in it, and this means something for somebody; grant the prayer, then, of me your poor servant who calls upon you, and let this be the very last day that the suitors dine in the house of Ulysses.
They have worn me out with labour of grinding meal for them, and I hope they may never have another dinner anywhere at all.” Ulysses was glad when he heard the omens conveyed to him by the woman’s speech, and by the thunder, for he knew they meant that he should avenge himself on the suitors.
Then the other maids in the house rose and lit the fire on the hearth; Telemachus also rose and put on his clothes.
He girded his sword about his shoulder, bound his sandals on to his comely feet, and took a doughty spear with a point of sharpened bronze; then he went to the threshold of the cloister and said to Euryclea, “Nurse, did you make the stranger comfortable both as regards bed and board, or did you let him shift for himself?—for my mother, good woman though she is, has a way of paying great attention to second-rate people, and of neglecting others who are in reality much better men.” “Do not find fault child,” said Euryclea, “when there is no one to find fault with.
The stranger sat and drank his wine as long as he liked: your mother did ask him if he would take any more bread and he said he would not.
When he wanted to go to bed she told the servants to make one for him, but he said he was such a wretched outcast that he would not sleep on a bed and under blankets; he insisted on having an undressed bullock’s hide and some sheepskins put for him in the cloister and I threw a cloak over him myself.”157 Then Telemachus went out of the court to the place where the Achaeans were meeting in assembly; he had his spear in his hand, and he was not alone, for his two dogs went with him.
But Euryclea called the maids and said, “Come, wake up; set about sweeping the cloisters and sprinkling them with water to lay the dust; put the covers on the seats; wipe down the tables, some of you, with a wet sponge; clean out the mixing-jugs and the cups, and go for water from the fountain at once; the suitors will be here directly; they will be here early, for it is a feast day.” Thus did she speak, and they did even as she had said: twenty of them went to the fountain for water, and the others set themselves busily to work about the house.
The men who were in attendance on the suitors also came up and began chopping firewood.
By and by the women returned from the fountain, and the swineherd came after them with the three best pigs he could pick out.
These he let feed about the premises, and then he said good-humouredly to Ulysses, “Stranger, are the suitors treating you any better now, or are they as insolent as ever?” “May heaven,” answered Ulysses, “requite to them the wickedness with which they deal high-handedly in another man’s house without any sense of shame.” Thus did they converse; meanwhile Melanthius the goatherd came up, for he too was bringing in his best goats for the suitors’ dinner; and he had two shepherds with him.
They tied the goats up under the gatehouse, and then Melanthius began gibing at Ulysses.
“Are you still here, stranger,” said he, “to pester people by begging about the house?
Why can you not go elsewhere?
You and I shall not come to an understanding before we have given each other a taste of our fists.
You beg without any sense of decency: are there not feasts elsewhere among the Achaeans, as well as here?” Ulysses made no answer, but bowed his head and brooded.
Then a third man, Philoetius, joined them, who was bringing in a barren heifer and some goats.
These were brought over by the boatmen who are there to take people over when any one comes to them.
So Philoetius made his heifer and his goats secure under the gatehouse, and then went up to the swineherd.
“Who, Swineherd,” said he, “is this stranger that is lately come here?
Is he one of your men?
What is his family?
Where does he come from?
Poor fellow, he looks as if he had been some great man, but the gods give sorrow to whom they will—even to kings if it so pleases them.” As he spoke he went up to Ulysses and saluted him with his right hand; “Good day to you, father stranger,” said he, “you seem to be very poorly off now, but I hope you will have better times by and by.
Father Jove, of all gods you are the most malicious.
We are your own children, yet you show us no mercy in all our misery and afflictions.
A sweat came over me when I saw this man, and my eyes filled with tears, for he reminds me of Ulysses, who I fear is going about in just such rags as this man’s are, if indeed he is still among the living.
If he is already dead and in the house of Hades, then, alas!
for my good master, who made me his stockman when I was quite young among the Cephallenians, and now his cattle are countless; no one could have done better with them than I have, for they have bred like ears of corn; nevertheless I have to keep bringing them in for others to eat, who take no heed to his son though he is in the house, and fear not the wrath of heaven, but are already eager to divide Ulysses’ property among them because he has been away so long.
I have often thought—only it would not be right while his son is living—of going off with the cattle to some foreign country; bad as this would be, it is still harder to stay here and be ill-treated about other people’s herds.
My position is intolerable, and I should long since have run away and put myself under the protection of some other chief, only that I believe my poor master will yet return, and send all these suitors flying out of the house.” “Stockman,” answered Ulysses, “you seem to be a very well-disposed person, and I can see that you are a man of sense.
Therefore I will tell you, and will confirm my words with an oath.
By Jove, the chief of all gods, and by that hearth of Ulysses to which I am now come, Ulysses shall return before you leave this place, and if you are so minded you shall see him killing the suitors who are now masters here.” “If Jove were to bring this to pass,” replied the stockman, “you should see how I would do my very utmost to help him.” And in like manner Eumaeus prayed that Ulysses might return home.
Thus did they converse.
Meanwhile the suitors were hatching a plot to murder Telemachus: but a bird flew near them on their left hand—an eagle with a dove in its talons.
On this Amphinomus said, “My friends, this plot of ours to murder Telemachus will not succeed; let us go to dinner instead.” The others assented, so they went inside and laid their cloaks on the benches and seats.
They sacrificed the sheep, goats, pigs, and the heifer, and when the inward meats were cooked they served them round.
They mixed the wine in the mixing-bowls, and the swineherd gave every man his cup, while Philoetius handed round the bread in the bread baskets, and Melanthius poured them out their wine.
Then they laid their hands upon the good things that were before them.
Telemachus purposely made Ulysses sit in the part of the cloister that was paved with stone;158 he gave him a shabby looking seat at a little table to himself, and had his portion of the inward meats brought to him, with his wine in a gold cup.
“Sit there,” said he, “and drink your wine among the great people.
I will put a stop to the gibes and blows of the suitors, for this is no public house, but belongs to Ulysses, and has passed from him to me.
Therefore, suitors, keep your hands and your tongues to yourselves, or there will be mischief.” The suitors bit their lips, and marvelled at the boldness of his speech; then Antinous said, “We do not like such language but we will put up with it, for Telemachus is threatening us in good earnest.
If Jove had let us we should have put a stop to his brave talk ere now.” Thus spoke Antinous, but Telemachus heeded him not.
Meanwhile the heralds were bringing the holy hecatomb through the city, and the Achaeans gathered under the shady grove of Apollo.
Then they roasted the outer meat, drew it off the spits, gave every man his portion, and feasted to their heart’s content; those who waited at table gave Ulysses exactly the same portion as the others had, for Telemachus had told them to do so.
But Minerva would not let the suitors for one moment drop their insolence, for she wanted Ulysses to become still more bitter against them.
Now there happened to be among them a ribald fellow, whose name was Ctesippus, and who came from Same.
This man, confident in his great wealth, was paying court to the wife of Ulysses, and said to the suitors, “Hear what I have to say.
The stranger has already had as large a portion as any one else; this is well, for it is not right nor reasonable to ill-treat any guest of Telemachus who comes here.
I will, however, make him a present on my own account, that he may have something to give to the bath-woman, or to some other of Ulysses’ servants.” As he spoke he picked up a heifer’s foot from the meat-basket in which it lay, and threw it at Ulysses, but Ulysses turned his head a little aside, and avoided it, smiling grimly Sardinian fashion159 as he did so, and it hit the wall, not him.
On this Telemachus spoke fiercely to Ctesippus, “It is a good thing for you,” said he, “that the stranger turned his head so that you missed him.
If you had hit him I should have run you through with my spear, and your father would have had to see about getting you buried rather than married in this house.
So let me have no more unseemly behaviour from any of you, for I am grown up now to the knowledge of good and evil and understand what is going on, instead of being the child that I have been heretofore.
I have long seen you killing my sheep and making free with my corn and wine: I have put up with this, for one man is no match for many, but do me no further violence.
Still, if you wish to kill me, kill me; I would far rather die than see such disgraceful scenes day after day—guests insulted, and men dragging the women servants about the house in an unseemly way.” They all held their peace till at last Agelaus son of Damastor said, “No one should take offence at what has just been said, nor gainsay it, for it is quite reasonable.
Leave off, therefore, ill-treating the stranger, or any one else of the servants who are about the house; I would say, however, a friendly word to Telemachus and his mother, which I trust may commend itself to both.
‘As long,’ I would say, ‘as you had ground for hoping that Ulysses would one day come home, no one could complain of your waiting and suffering160 the suitors to be in your house.
It would have been better that he should have returned, but it is now sufficiently clear that he will never do so; therefore talk all this quietly over with your mother, and tell her to marry the best man, and the one who makes her the most advantageous offer.
Thus you will yourself be able to manage your own inheritance, and to eat and drink in peace, while your mother will look after some other man’s house, not yours.’” To this Telemachus answered, “By Jove, Agelaus, and by the sorrows of my unhappy father, who has either perished far from Ithaca, or is wandering in some distant land, I throw no obstacles in the way of my mother’s marriage; on the contrary I urge her to choose whomsoever she will, and I will give her numberless gifts into the bargain, but I dare not insist point blank that she shall leave the house against her own wishes.
Heaven forbid that I should do this.” Minerva now made the suitors fall to laughing immoderately, and set their wits wandering; but they were laughing with a forced laughter.
Their meat became smeared with blood; their eyes filled with tears, and their hearts were heavy with forebodings.
Theoclymenus saw this and said, “Unhappy men, what is it that ails you?
There is a shroud of darkness drawn over you from head to foot, your cheeks are wet with tears; the air is alive with wailing voices; the walls and roof-beams drip blood; the gate of the cloisters and the court beyond them are full of ghosts trooping down into the night of hell; the sun is blotted out of heaven, and a blighting gloom is over all the land.” Thus did he speak, and they all of them laughed heartily.
Eurymachus then said, “This stranger who has lately come here has lost his senses.
Servants, turn him out into the streets, since he finds it so dark here.” But Theoclymenus said, “Eurymachus, you need not send any one with me.
I have eyes, ears, and a pair of feet of my own, to say nothing of an understanding mind.
I will take these out of the house with me, for I see mischief overhanging you, from which not one of you men who are insulting people and plotting ill deeds in the house of Ulysses will be able to escape.” He left the house as he spoke, and went back to Piraeus who gave him welcome, but the suitors kept looking at one another and provoking Telemachus by laughing at the strangers.
One insolent fellow said to him, “Telemachus, you are not happy in your guests; first you have this importunate tramp, who comes begging bread and wine and has no skill for work or for hard fighting, but is perfectly useless, and now here is another fellow who is setting himself up as a prophet.
Let me persuade you, for it will be much better to put them on board ship and send them off to the Sicels to sell for what they will bring.” Telemachus gave him no heed, but sate silently watching his father, expecting every moment that he would begin his attack upon the suitors.
Meanwhile the daughter of Icarius, wise Penelope, had had a rich seat placed for her facing the court and cloisters, so that she could hear what every one was saying.
The dinner indeed had been prepared amid much merriment; it had been both good and abundant, for they had sacrificed many victims; but the supper was yet to come, and nothing can be conceived more gruesome than the meal which a goddess and a brave man were soon to lay before them—for they had brought their doom upon themselves.
BOOK XXI THE TRIAL OF THE AXES, DURING WHICH ULYSSES REVEALS HIMSELF TO EUMAEUS AND PHILOETIUS Minerva now put it in Penelope’s mind to make the suitors try their skill with the bow and with the iron axes, in contest among themselves, as a means of bringing about their destruction.
She went upstairs and got the store-room key, which was made of bronze and had a handle of ivory; she then went with her maidens into the store-room at the end of the house, where her husband’s treasures of gold, bronze, and wrought iron were kept, and where was also his bow, and the quiver full of deadly arrows that had been given him by a friend whom he had met in Lacedaemon—Iphitus the son of Eurytus.
The two fell in with one another in Messene at the house of Ortilochus, where Ulysses was staying in order to recover a debt that was owing from the whole people; for the Messenians had carried off three hundred sheep from Ithaca, and had sailed away with them and with their shepherds.
In quest of these Ulysses took a long journey while still quite young, for his father and the other chieftains sent him on a mission to recover them.
Iphitus had gone there also to try and get back twelve brood mares that he had lost, and the mule foals that were running with them.
These mares were the death of him in the end, for when he went to the house of Jove’s son, mighty Hercules, who performed such prodigies of valour, Hercules to his shame killed him, though he was his guest, for he feared not heaven’s vengeance, nor yet respected his own table which he had set before Iphitus, but killed him in spite of everything, and kept the mares himself.
It was when claiming these that Iphitus met Ulysses, and gave him the bow which mighty Eurytus had been used to carry, and which on his death had been left by him to his son.
Ulysses gave him in return a sword and a spear, and this was the beginning of a fast friendship, although they never visited at one another’s houses, for Jove’s son Hercules killed Iphitus ere they could do so.
This bow, then, given him by Iphitus, had not been taken with him by Ulysses when he sailed for Troy; he had used it so long as he had been at home, but had left it behind as having been a keepsake from a valued friend.
Penelope presently reached the oak threshold of the store-room; the carpenter had planed this duly, and had drawn a line on it so as to get it quite straight; he had then set the door posts into it and hung the doors.
She loosed the strap from the handle of the door, put in the key, and drove it straight home to shoot back the bolts that held the doors;161 these flew open with a noise like a bull bellowing in a meadow, and Penelope stepped upon the raised platform, where the chests stood in which the fair linen and clothes were laid by along with fragrant herbs: reaching thence, she took down the bow with its bow case from the peg on which it hung.
She sat down with it on her knees, weeping bitterly as she took the bow out of its case, and when her tears had relieved her, she went to the cloister where the suitors were, carrying the bow and the quiver, with the many deadly arrows that were inside it.
Along with her came her maidens, bearing a chest that contained much iron and bronze which her husband had won as prizes.
When she reached the suitors, she stood by one of the bearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloister, holding a veil before her face, and with a maid on either side of her.
Then she said: “Listen to me you suitors, who persist in abusing the hospitality of this house because its owner has been long absent, and without other pretext than that you want to marry me; this, then, being the prize that you are contending for, I will bring out the mighty bow of Ulysses, and whomsoever of you shall string it most easily and send his arrow through each one of twelve axes, him will I follow and quit this house of my lawful husband, so goodly, and so abounding in wealth.
But even so I doubt not that I shall remember it in my dreams.” As she spoke, she told Eumaeus to set the bow and the pieces of iron before the suitors, and Eumaeus wept as he took them to do as she had bidden him.
Hard by, the stockman wept also when he saw his master’s bow, but Antinous scolded them.
“You country louts,” said he, “silly simpletons; why should you add to the sorrows of your mistress by crying in this way?
She has enough to grieve her in the loss of her husband; sit still, therefore, and eat your dinners in silence, or go outside if you want to cry, and leave the bow behind you.
We suitors shall have to contend for it with might and main, for we shall find it no light matter to string such a bow as this is.
There is not a man of us all who is such another as Ulysses; for I have seen him and remember him, though I was then only a child.” This was what he said, but all the time he was expecting to be able to string the bow and shoot through the iron, whereas in fact he was to be the first that should taste of the arrows from the hands of Ulysses, whom he was dishonouring in his own house—egging the others on to do so also.
Then Telemachus spoke.
“Great heavens!” he exclaimed, “Jove must have robbed me of my senses.
Here is my dear and excellent mother saying she will quit this house and marry again, yet I am laughing and enjoying myself as though there were nothing happening.
But, suitors, as the contest has been agreed upon, let it go forward.
It is for a woman whose peer is not to be found in Pylos, Argos, or Mycene, nor yet in Ithaca nor on the mainland.
You know this as well as I do; what need have I to speak in praise of my mother?
Come on, then, make no excuses for delay, but let us see whether you can string the bow or no.
I too will make trial of it, for if I can string it and shoot through the iron, I shall not suffer my mother to quit this house with a stranger, not if I can win the prizes which my father won before me.” As he spoke he sprang from his seat, threw his crimson cloak from him, and took his sword from his shoulder.
First he set the axes in a row, in a long groove which he had dug for them, and had made straight by line.162 Then he stamped the earth tight round them, and everyone was surprised when they saw him set them up so orderly, though he had never seen anything of the kind before.
This done, he went on to the pavement to make trial of the bow; thrice did he tug at it, trying with all his might to draw the string, and thrice he had to leave off, though he had hoped to string the bow and shoot through the iron.
He was trying for the fourth time, and would have strung it had not Ulysses made a sign to check him in spite of all his eagerness.
So he said: “Alas!
I shall either be always feeble and of no prowess, or I am too young, and have not yet reached my full strength so as to be able to hold my own if any one attacks me.
You others, therefore, who are stronger than I, make trial of the bow and get this contest settled.” On this he put the bow down, letting it lean against the door [that led into the house] with the arrow standing against the top of the bow.
Then he sat down on the seat from which he had risen, and Antinous said: “Come on each of you in his turn, going towards the right from the place at which the cupbearer begins when he is handing round the wine.” The rest agreed, and Leiodes son of Oenops was the first to rise.
He was sacrificial priest to the suitors, and sat in the corner near the mixing-bowl.
163 He was the only man who hated their evil deeds and was indignant with the others.
He was now the first to take the bow and arrow, so he went on to the pavement to make his trial, but he could not string the bow, for his hands were weak and unused to hard work, they therefore soon grew tired, and he said to the suitors, “My friends, I cannot string it; let another have it, this bow shall take the life and soul out of many a chief among us, for it is better to die than to live after having missed the prize that we have so long striven for, and which has brought us so long together.
Some one of us is even now hoping and praying that he may marry Penelope, but when he has seen this bow and tried it, let him woo and make bridal offerings to some other woman, and let Penelope marry whoever makes her the best offer and whose lot it is to win her.” On this he put the bow down, letting it lean against the door,164 with the arrow standing against the tip of the bow.
Then he took his seat again on the seat from which he had risen; and Antinous rebuked him saying: “Leiodes, what are you talking about?
Your words are monstrous and intolerable; it makes me angry to listen to you.
Shall, then, this bow take the life of many a chief among us, merely because you cannot bend it yourself?
True, you were not born to be an archer, but there are others who will soon string it.” Then he said to Melanthius the goatherd, “Look sharp, light a fire in the court, and set a seat hard by with a sheep skin on it; bring us also a large ball of lard, from what they have in the house.
Let us warm the bow and grease it—we will then make trial of it again, and bring the contest to an end.” Melanthius lit the fire, and set a seat covered with sheep skins beside it.
He also brought a great ball of lard from what they had in the house, and the suitors warmed the bow and again made trial of it, but they were none of them nearly strong enough to string it.
Nevertheless there still remained Antinous and Eurymachus, who were the ringleaders among the suitors and much the foremost among them all.
Then the swineherd and the stockman left the cloisters together, and Ulysses followed them.
When they had got outside the gates and the outer yard, Ulysses said to them quietly: “Stockman, and you swineherd, I have something in my mind which I am in doubt whether to say or no; but I think I will say it.
What manner of men would you be to stand by Ulysses, if some god should bring him back here all of a sudden?
Say which you are disposed to do—to side with the suitors, or with Ulysses?” “Father Jove,” answered the stockman, “would indeed that you might so ordain it.
If some god were but to bring Ulysses back, you should see with what might and main I would fight for him.” In like words Eumaeus prayed to all the gods that Ulysses might return; when, therefore, he saw for certain what mind they were of, Ulysses said, “It is I, Ulysses, who am here.
I have suffered much, but at last, in the twentieth year, I am come back to my own country.
I find that you two alone of all my servants are glad that I should do so, for I have not heard any of the others praying for my return.
To you two, therefore, will I unfold the truth as it shall be.
If heaven shall deliver the suitors into my hands, I will find wives for both of you, will give you house and holding close to my own, and you shall be to me as though you were brothers and friends of Telemachus.
I will now give you convincing proofs that you may know me and be assured.
See, here is the scar from the boar’s tooth that ripped me when I was out hunting on Mt.
Parnassus with the sons of Autolycus.” As he spoke he drew his rags aside from the great scar, and when they had examined it thoroughly, they both of them wept about Ulysses, threw their arms round him, and kissed his head and shoulders, while Ulysses kissed their hands and faces in return.
The sun would have gone down upon their mourning if Ulysses had not checked them and said: “Cease your weeping, lest some one should come outside and see us, and tell those who are within.
When you go in, do so separately, not both together; I will go first, and do you follow afterwards; let this moreover be the token between us; the suitors will all of them try to prevent me from getting hold of the bow and quiver; do you, therefore, Eumaeus, place it in my hands when you are carrying it about, and tell the women to close the doors of their apartment.
If they hear any groaning or uproar as of men fighting about the house, they must not come out; they must keep quiet, and stay where they are at their work.
And I charge you, Philoetius, to make fast the doors of the outer court, and to bind them securely at once.” When he had thus spoken, he went back to the house and took the seat that he had left.
Presently, his two servants followed him inside.
At this moment the bow was in the hands of Eurymachus, who was warming it by the fire, but even so he could not string it, and he was greatly grieved.
He heaved a deep sigh and said, “I grieve for myself and for us all; I grieve that I shall have to forgo the marriage, but I do not care nearly so much about this, for there are plenty of other women in Ithaca and elsewhere; what I feel most is the fact of our being so inferior to Ulysses in strength that we cannot string his bow.
This will disgrace us in the eyes of those who are yet unborn.” “It shall not be so, Eurymachus,” said Antinous, “and you know it yourself.
Today is the feast of Apollo throughout all the land; who can string a bow on such a day as this?
Put it on one side—as for the axes they can stay where they are, for no one is likely to come to the house and take them away: let the cupbearer go round with his cups, that we may make our drink-offerings and drop this matter of the bow; we will tell Melanthius to bring us in some goats tomorrow—the best he has; we can then offer thigh bones to Apollo the mighty archer, and again make trial of the bow, so as to bring the contest to an end.” The rest approved his words, and thereon men servants poured water over the hands of the guests, while pages filled the mixing-bowls with wine and water and handed it round after giving every man his drink-offering.
Then, when they had made their offerings and had drunk each as much as he desired, Ulysses craftily said:— “Suitors of the illustrious queen, listen that I may speak even as I am minded.
I appeal more especially to Eurymachus, and to Antinous who has just spoken with so much reason.
Cease shooting for the present and leave the matter to the gods, but in the morning let heaven give victory to whom it will.
For the moment, however, give me the bow that I may prove the power of my hands among you all, and see whether I still have as much strength as I used to have, or whether travel and neglect have made an end of it.” This made them all very angry, for they feared he might string the bow, Antinous therefore rebuked him fiercely saying, “Wretched creature, you have not so much as a grain of sense in your whole body; you ought to think yourself lucky in being allowed to dine unharmed among your betters, without having any smaller portion served you than we others have had, and in being allowed to hear our conversation.
No other beggar or stranger has been allowed to hear what we say among ourselves; the wine must have been doing you a mischief, as it does with all those who drink immoderately.
It was wine that inflamed the Centaur Eurytion when he was staying with Peirithous among the Lapithae.
When the wine had got into his head, he went mad and did ill deeds about the house of Peirithous; this angered the heroes who were there assembled, so they rushed at him and cut off his ears and nostrils; then they dragged him through the doorway out of the house, so he went away crazed, and bore the burden of his crime, bereft of understanding.
Henceforth, therefore, there was war between mankind and the centaurs, but he brought it upon himself through his own drunkenness.
In like manner I can tell you that it will go hardly with you if you string the bow: you will find no mercy from any one here, for we shall at once ship you off to king Echetus, who kills every one that comes near him: you will never get away alive, so drink and keep quiet without getting into a quarrel with men younger than yourself.” Penelope then spoke to him.
“Antinous,” said she, “it is not right that you should ill-treat any guest of Telemachus who comes to this house.
If the stranger should prove strong enough to string the mighty bow of Ulysses, can you suppose that he would take me home with him and make me his wife?
Even the man himself can have no such idea in his mind: none of you need let that disturb his feasting; it would be out of all reason.” “Queen Penelope,” answered Eurymachus, “we do not suppose that this man will take you away with him; it is impossible; but we are afraid lest some of the baser sort, men or women among the Achaeans, should go gossiping about and say, ‘These suitors are a feeble folk; they are paying court to the wife of a brave man whose bow not one of them was able to string, and yet a beggarly tramp who came to the house strung it at once and sent an arrow through the iron.’ This is what will be said, and it will be a scandal against us.” “Eurymachus,” Penelope answered, “people who persist in eating up the estate of a great chieftain and dishonouring his house must not expect others to think well of them.
Why then should you mind if men talk as you think they will?
This stranger is strong and well-built, he says moreover that he is of noble birth.
Give him the bow, and let us see whether he can string it or no.
I say—and it shall surely be—that if Apollo vouchsafes him the glory of stringing it, I will give him a cloak and shirt of good wear, with a javelin to keep off dogs and robbers, and a sharp sword.
I will also give him sandals, and will see him sent safely wherever he wants to go.” Then Telemachus said, “Mother, I am the only man either in Ithaca or in the islands that are over against Elis who has the right to let any one have the bow or to refuse it.
No one shall force me one way or the other, not even though I choose to make the stranger a present of the bow outright, and let him take it away with him.
Go, then, within the house and busy yourself with your daily duties, your loom, your distaff, and the ordering of your servants.
This bow is a man’s matter, and mine above all others, for it is I who am master here.” She went wondering back into the house, and laid her son’s saying in her heart.
Then going upstairs with her handmaids into her room, she mourned her dear husband till Minerva sent sweet sleep over her eyelids.
The swineherd now took up the bow and was for taking it to Ulysses, but the suitors clamoured at him from all parts of the cloisters, and one of them said, “You idiot, where are you taking the bow to?
Are you out of your wits?
If Apollo and the other gods will grant our prayer, your own boarhounds shall get you into some quiet little place, and worry you to death.” Eumaeus was frightened at the outcry they all raised, so he put the bow down then and there, but Telemachus shouted out at him from the other side of the cloisters, and threatened him saying, “Father Eumaeus, bring the bow on in spite of them, or young as I am I will pelt you with stones back to the country, for I am the better man of the two.
I wish I was as much stronger than all the other suitors in the house as I am than you, I would soon send some of them off sick and sorry, for they mean mischief.” Thus did he speak, and they all of them laughed heartily, which put them in a better humour with Telemachus; so Eumaeus brought the bow on and placed it in the hands of Ulysses.
When he had done this, he called Euryclea apart and said to her, “Euryclea, Telemachus says you are to close the doors of the women’s apartments.
If they hear any groaning or uproar as of men fighting about the house, they are not to come out, but are to keep quiet and stay where they are at their work.” Euryclea did as she was told and closed the doors of the women’s apartments.
Meanwhile Philoetius slipped quietly out and made fast the gates of the outer court.
There was a ship’s cable of byblus fibre lying in the gatehouse, so he made the gates fast with it and then came in again, resuming the seat that he had left, and keeping an eye on Ulysses, who had now got the bow in his hands, and was turning it every way about, and proving it all over to see whether the worms had been eating into its two horns during his absence.
Then would one turn towards his neighbour saying, “This is some tricky old bow-fancier; either he has got one like it at home, or he wants to make one, in such workmanlike style does the old vagabond handle it.” Another said, “I hope he may be no more successful in other things than he is likely to be in stringing this bow.” But Ulysses, when he had taken it up and examined it all over, strung it as easily as a skilled bard strings a new peg of his lyre and makes the twisted gut fast at both ends.
Then he took it in his right hand to prove the string, and it sang sweetly under his touch like the twittering of a swallow.
The suitors were dismayed, and turned colour as they heard it; at that moment, moreover, Jove thundered loudly as a sign, and the heart of Ulysses rejoiced as he heard the omen that the son of scheming Saturn had sent him.
He took an arrow that was lying upon the table165—for those which the Achaeans were so shortly about to taste were all inside the quiver—he laid it on the centre-piece of the bow, and drew the notch of the arrow and the string toward him, still seated on his seat.
When he had taken aim he let fly, and his arrow pierced every one of the handle-holes of the axes from the first onwards till it had gone right through them, and into the outer courtyard.
Then he said to Telemachus: “Your guest has not disgraced you, Telemachus.
I did not miss what I aimed at, and I was not long in stringing my bow.
I am still strong, and not as the suitors twit me with being.
Now, however, it is time for the Achaeans to prepare supper while there is still daylight, and then otherwise to disport themselves with song and dance which are the crowning ornaments of a banquet.” As he spoke he made a sign with his eyebrows, and Telemachus girded on his sword, grasped his spear, and stood armed beside his father’s seat.
BOOK XXII THE KILLING OF THE SUITORS—THE MAIDS WHO HAVE MISCONDUCTED THEMSELVES ARE MADE TO CLEANSE THE CLOISTERS AND ARE THEN HANGED.
Then Ulysses tore off his rags, and sprang on to the broad pavement with his bow and his quiver full of arrows.
He shed the arrows on to the ground at his feet and said, “The mighty contest is at an end.
I will now see whether Apollo will vouchsafe it to me to hit another mark which no man has yet hit.” On this he aimed a deadly arrow at Antinous, who was about to take up a two-handled gold cup to drink his wine and already had it in his hands.
He had no thought of death—who amongst all the revellers would think that one man, however brave, would stand alone among so many and kill him?
The arrow struck Antinous in the throat, and the point went clean through his neck, so that he fell over and the cup dropped from his hand, while a thick stream of blood gushed from his nostrils.
He kicked the table from him and upset the things on it, so that the bread and roasted meats were all soiled as they fell over on to the ground.166 The suitors were in an uproar when they saw that a man had been hit; they sprang in dismay one and all of them from their seats and looked everywhere towards the walls, but there was neither shield nor spear, and they rebuked Ulysses very angrily.
“Stranger,” said they, “you shall pay for shooting people in this way: you shall see no other contest; you are a doomed man; he whom you have slain was the foremost youth in Ithaca, and the vultures shall devour you for having killed him.” Thus they spoke, for they thought that he had killed Antinous by mistake, and did not perceive that death was hanging over the head of every one of them.
But Ulysses glared at them and said: “Dogs, did you think that I should not come back from Troy?
You have wasted my substance,167 have forced my women servants to lie with you, and have wooed my wife while I was still living.
You have feared neither God nor man, and now you shall die.” They turned pale with fear as he spoke, and every man looked round about to see whither he might fly for safety, but Eurymachus alone spoke.
“If you are Ulysses,” said he, “then what you have said is just.
We have done much wrong on your lands and in your house.
But Antinous who was the head and front of the offending lies low already.
It was all his doing.
It was not that he wanted to marry Penelope; he did not so much care about that; what he wanted was something quite different, and Jove has not vouchsafed it to him; he wanted to kill your son and to be chief man in Ithaca.
Now, therefore, that he has met the death which was his due, spare the lives of your people.
We will make everything good among ourselves, and pay you in full for all that we have eaten and drunk.
Each one of us shall pay you a fine worth twenty oxen, and we will keep on giving you gold and bronze till your heart is softened.
Until we have done this no one can complain of your being enraged against us.” Ulysses again glared at him and said, “Though you should give me all that you have in the world both now and all that you ever shall have, I will not stay my hand till I have paid all of you in full.
You must fight, or fly for your lives; and fly, not a man of you shall.” Their hearts sank as they heard him, but Eurymachus again spoke saying: “My friends, this man will give us no quarter.
He will stand where he is and shoot us down till he has killed every man among us.
Let us then show fight; draw your swords, and hold up the tables to shield you from his arrows.
Let us have at him with a rush, to drive him from the pavement and doorway: we can then get through into the town, and raise such an alarm as shall soon stay his shooting.” As he spoke he drew his keen blade of bronze, sharpened on both sides, and with a loud cry sprang towards Ulysses, but Ulysses instantly shot an arrow into his breast that caught him by the nipple and fixed itself in his liver.
He dropped his sword and fell doubled up over his table.
The cup and all the meats went over on to the ground as he smote the earth with his forehead in the agonies of death, and he kicked the stool with his feet until his eyes were closed in darkness.
Then Amphinomus drew his sword and made straight at Ulysses to try and get him away from the door; but Telemachus was too quick for him, and struck him from behind; the spear caught him between the shoulders and went right through his chest, so that he fell heavily to the ground and struck the earth with his forehead.
Then Telemachus sprang away from him, leaving his spear still in the body, for he feared that if he stayed to draw it out, some one of the Achaeans might come up and hack at him with his sword, or knock him down, so he set off at a run, and immediately was at his father’s side.
Then he said: “Father, let me bring you a shield, two spears, and a brass helmet for your temples.
I will arm myself as well, and will bring other armour for the swineherd and the stockman, for we had better be armed.” “Run and fetch them,” answered Ulysses, “while my arrows hold out, or when I am alone they may get me away from the door.” Telemachus did as his father said, and went off to the store room where the armour was kept.
He chose four shields, eight spears, and four brass helmets with horse-hair plumes.
He brought them with all speed to his father, and armed himself first, while the stockman and the swineherd also put on their armour, and took their places near Ulysses.
Meanwhile Ulysses, as long as his arrows lasted, had been shooting the suitors one by one, and they fell thick on one another: when his arrows gave out, he set the bow to stand against the end wall of the house by the door post, and hung a shield four hides thick about his shoulders; on his comely head he set his helmet, well wrought with a crest of horse-hair that nodded menacingly above it,168 and he grasped two redoubtable bronze-shod spears.
Now there was a trap door169 on the wall, while at one end of the pavement170 there was an exit leading to a narrow passage, and this exit was closed by a well-made door.
Ulysses told Philoetius to stand by this door and guard it, for only one person could attack it at a time.
But Agelaus shouted out, “Cannot some one go up to the trap door and tell the people what is going on?
Help would come at once, and we should soon make an end of this man and his shooting.” “This may not be, Agelaus,” answered Melanthius, “the mouth of the narrow passage is dangerously near the entrance to the outer court.
One brave man could prevent any number from getting in.
But I know what I will do, I will bring you arms from the store-room, for I am sure it is there that Ulysses and his son have put them.” On this the goatherd Melanthius went by back passages to the store-room of Ulysses’ house.
There he chose twelve shields, with as many helmets and spears, and brought them back as fast as he could to give them to the suitors.
Ulysses’ heart began to fail him when he saw the suitors171 putting on their armour and brandishing their spears.
He saw the greatness of the danger, and said to Telemachus, “Some one of the women inside is helping the suitors against us, or it may be Melanthius.” Telemachus answered, “The fault, father, is mine, and mine only; I left the store room door open, and they have kept a sharper look out than I have.
Go, Eumaeus, put the door to, and see whether it is one of the women who is doing this, or whether, as I suspect, it is Melanthius the son of Dolius.” Thus did they converse.
Meanwhile Melanthius was again going to the store room to fetch more armour, but the swineherd saw him and said to Ulysses who was beside him, “Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, it is that scoundrel Melanthius, just as we suspected, who is going to the store room.
Say, shall I kill him, if I can get the better of him, or shall I bring him here that you may take your own revenge for all the many wrongs that he has done in your house?” Ulysses answered, “Telemachus and I will hold these suitors in check, no matter what they do; go back both of you and bind Melanthius’ hands and feet behind him.
Throw him into the store room and make the door fast behind you; then fasten a noose about his body, and string him close up to the rafters from a high bearing-post,172 that he may linger on in an agony.” Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said; they went to the store room, which they entered before Melanthius saw them, for he was busy searching for arms in the innermost part of the room, so the two took their stand on either side of the door and waited.
By and by Melanthius came out with a helmet in one hand, and an old dry-rotted shield in the other, which had been borne by Laertes when he was young, but which had been long since thrown aside, and the straps had become unsewn; on this the two seized him, dragged him back by the hair, and threw him struggling to the ground.
They bent his hands and feet well behind his back, and bound them tight with a painful bond as Ulysses had told them; then they fastened a noose about his body and strung him up from a high pillar till he was close up to the rafters, and over him did you then vaunt, O swineherd Eumaeus saying, “Melanthius, you will pass the night on a soft bed as you deserve.
You will know very well when morning comes from the streams of Oceanus, and it is time for you to be driving in your goats for the suitors to feast on.” There, then, they left him in very cruel bondage, and having put on their armour they closed the door behind them and went back to take their places by the side of Ulysses; whereon the four men stood in the cloister, fierce and full of fury; nevertheless, those who were in the body of the court were still both brave and many.
Then Jove’s daughter Minerva came up to them, having assumed the voice and form of Mentor.
Ulysses was glad when he saw her and said, “Mentor, lend me your help, and forget not your old comrade, nor the many good turns he has done you.
Besides, you are my age-mate.” But all the time he felt sure it was Minerva, and the suitors from the other side raised an uproar when they saw her.
Agelaus was the first to reproach her.
“Mentor,” he cried, “do not let Ulysses beguile you into siding with him and fighting the suitors.
This is what we will do: when we have killed these people, father and son, we will kill you too.
You shall pay for it with your head, and when we have killed you, we will take all you have, in doors or out, and bring it into hotch-pot with Ulysses’ property; we will not let your sons live in your house, nor your daughters, nor shall your widow continue to live in the city of Ithaca.” This made Minerva still more furious, so she scolded Ulysses very angrily.173 “Ulysses,” said she, “your strength and prowess are no longer what they were when you fought for nine long years among the Trojans about the noble lady Helen.
You killed many a man in those days, and it was through your stratagem that Priam’s city was taken.
How comes it that you are so lamentably less valiant now that you are on your own ground, face to face with the suitors in your own house?
Come on, my good fellow, stand by my side and see how Mentor, son of Alcimus shall fight your foes and requite your kindnesses conferred upon him.” But she would not give him full victory as yet, for she wished still further to prove his own prowess and that of his brave son, so she flew up to one of the rafters in the roof of the cloister and sat upon it in the form of a swallow.
Meanwhile Agelaus son of Damastor, Eurynomus, Amphimedon, Demoptolemus, Pisander, and Polybus son of Polyctor bore the brunt of the fight upon the suitors’ side; of all those who were still fighting for their lives they were by far the most valiant, for the others had already fallen under the arrows of Ulysses.
Agelaus shouted to them and said, “My friends, he will soon have to leave off, for Mentor has gone away after having done nothing for him but brag.
They are standing at the doors unsupported.
Do not aim at him all at once, but six of you throw your spears first, and see if you cannot cover yourselves with glory by killing him.
When he has fallen we need not be uneasy about the others.” They threw their spears as he bade them, but Minerva made them all of no effect.
One hit the door post; another went against the door; the pointed shaft of another struck the wall; and as soon as they had avoided all the spears of the suitors Ulysses said to his own men, “My friends, I should say we too had better let drive into the middle of them, or they will crown all the harm they have done us by killing us outright.” They therefore aimed straight in front of them and threw their spears.
Ulysses killed Demoptolemus, Telemachus Euryades, Eumaeus Elatus, while the stockman killed Pisander.
These all bit the dust, and as the others drew back into a corner Ulysses and his men rushed forward and regained their spears by drawing them from the bodies of the dead.
The suitors now aimed a second time, but again Minerva made their weapons for the most part without effect.
One hit a bearing-post of the cloister; another went against the door; while the pointed shaft of another struck the wall.
Still, Amphimedon just took a piece of the top skin from off Telemachus’s wrist, and Ctesippus managed to graze Eumaeus’s shoulder above his shield; but the spear went on and fell to the ground.
Then Ulysses and his men let drive into the crowd of suitors.
Ulysses hit Eurydamas, Telemachus Amphimedon, and Eumaeus Polybus.
After this the stockman hit Ctesippus in the breast, and taunted him saying, “Foul-mouthed son of Polytherses, do not be so foolish as to talk wickedly another time, but let heaven direct your speech, for the gods are far stronger than men.
I make you a present of this advice to repay you for the foot which you gave Ulysses when he was begging about in his own house.” Thus spoke the stockman, and Ulysses struck the son of Damastor with a spear in close fight, while Telemachus hit Leocritus son of Evenor in the belly, and the dart went clean through him, so that he fell forward full on his face upon the ground.
Then Minerva from her seat on the rafter held up her deadly aegis, and the hearts of the suitors quailed.
They fled to the other end of the court like a herd of cattle maddened by the gadfly in early summer when the days are at their longest.
As eagle-beaked, crook-taloned vultures from the mountains swoop down on the smaller birds that cower in flocks upon the ground, and kill them, for they cannot either fight or fly, and lookers on enjoy the sport—even so did Ulysses and his men fall upon the suitors and smite them on every side.
They made a horrible groaning as their brains were being battered in, and the ground seethed with their blood.
Leiodes then caught the knees of Ulysses and said, “Ulysses I beseech you have mercy upon me and spare me.
I never wronged any of the women in your house either in word or deed, and I tried to stop the others.
I saw them, but they would not listen, and now they are paying for their folly.
I was their sacrificing priest; if you kill me, I shall die without having done anything to deserve it, and shall have got no thanks for all the good that I did.” Ulysses looked sternly at him and answered, “If you were their sacrificing priest, you must have prayed many a time that it might be long before I got home again, and that you might marry my wife and have children by her.
Therefore you shall die.” With these words he picked up the sword that Agelaus had dropped when he was being killed, and which was lying upon the ground.
Then he struck Leiodes on the back of his neck, so that his head fell rolling in the dust while he was yet speaking.
The minstrel Phemius son of Terpes—he who had been forced by the suitors to sing to them—now tried to save his life.
He was standing near towards the trap door,174 and held his lyre in his hand.
He did not know whether to fly out of the cloister and sit down by the altar of Jove that was in the outer court, and on which both Laertes and Ulysses had offered up the thigh bones of many an ox, or whether to go straight up to Ulysses and embrace his knees, but in the end he deemed it best to embrace Ulysses’ knees.
So he laid his lyre on the ground between the mixing bowl 175 and the silver-studded seat; then going up to Ulysses he caught hold of his knees and said, “Ulysses, I beseech you have mercy on me and spare me.
You will be sorry for it afterwards if you kill a bard who can sing both for gods and men as I can.
I make all my lays myself, and heaven visits me with every kind of inspiration.
I would sing to you as though you were a god, do not therefore be in such a hurry to cut my head off.
Your own son Telemachus will tell you that I did not want to frequent your house and sing to the suitors after their meals, but they were too many and too strong for me, so they made me.” Telemachus heard him, and at once went up to his father.
“Hold!” he cried, “the man is guiltless, do him no hurt; and we will spare Medon too, who was always good to me when I was a boy, unless Philoetius or Eumaeus has already killed him, or he has fallen in your way when you were raging about the court.” Medon caught these words of Telemachus, for he was crouching under a seat beneath which he had hidden by covering himself up with a freshly flayed heifer’s hide, so he threw off the hide, went up to Telemachus, and laid hold of his knees.
“Here I am, my dear sir,” said he, “stay your hand therefore, and tell your father, or he will kill me in his rage against the suitors for having wasted his substance and been so foolishly disrespectful to yourself.” Ulysses smiled at him and answered, “Fear not; Telemachus has saved your life, that you may know in future, and tell other people, how greatly better good deeds prosper than evil ones.
Go, therefore, outside the cloisters into the outer court, and be out of the way of the slaughter—you and the bard—while I finish my work here inside.” The pair went into the outer court as fast as they could, and sat down by Jove’s great altar, looking fearfully round, and still expecting that they would be killed.
Then Ulysses searched the whole court carefully over, to see if anyone had managed to hide himself and was still living, but he found them all lying in the dust and weltering in their blood.
They were like fishes which fishermen have netted out of the sea, and thrown upon the beach to lie gasping for water till the heat of the sun makes an end of them.
Even so were the suitors lying all huddled up one against the other.
Then Ulysses said to Telemachus, “Call nurse Euryclea; I have something to say to her.” Telemachus went and knocked at the door of the women’s room.
“Make haste,” said he, “you old woman who have been set over all the other women in the house.
Come outside; my father wishes to speak to you.” When Euryclea heard this she unfastened the door of the women’s room and came out, following Telemachus.
She found Ulysses among the corpses bespattered with blood and filth like a lion that has just been devouring an ox, and his breast and both his cheeks are all bloody, so that he is a fearful sight; even so was Ulysses besmirched from head to foot with gore.
When she saw all the corpses and such a quantity of blood, she was beginning to cry out for joy, for she saw that a great deed had been done; but Ulysses checked her, “Old woman,” said he, “rejoice in silence; restrain yourself, and do not make any noise about it; it is an unholy thing to vaunt over dead men.
Heaven’s doom and their own evil deeds have brought these men to destruction, for they respected no man in the whole world, neither rich nor poor, who came near them, and they have come to a bad end as a punishment for their wickedness and folly.
Now, however, tell me which of the women in the house have misconducted themselves, and who are innocent.”176 “I will tell you the truth, my son,” answered Euryclea.
“There are fifty women in the house whom we teach to do things, such as carding wool, and all kinds of household work.
Of these, twelve in all177 have misbehaved, and have been wanting in respect to me, and also to Penelope.
They showed no disrespect to Telemachus, for he has only lately grown and his mother never permitted him to give orders to the female servants; but let me go upstairs and tell your wife all that has happened, for some god has been sending her to sleep.” “Do not wake her yet,” answered Ulysses, “but tell the women who have misconducted themselves to come to me.” Euryclea left the cloister to tell the women, and make them come to Ulysses; in the meantime he called Telemachus, the stockman, and the swineherd.
“Begin,” said he, “to remove the dead, and make the women help you.
Then, get sponges and clean water to swill down the tables and seats.
When you have thoroughly cleansed the whole cloisters, take the women into the space between the domed room and the wall of the outer court, and run them through with your swords till they are quite dead, and have forgotten all about love and the way in which they used to lie in secret with the suitors.” On this the women came down in a body, weeping and wailing bitterly.
First they carried the dead bodies out, and propped them up against one another in the gatehouse.
Ulysses ordered them about and made them do their work quickly, so they had to carry the bodies out.
When they had done this, they cleaned all the tables and seats with sponges and water, while Telemachus and the two others shovelled up the blood and dirt from the ground, and the women carried it all away and put it out of doors.
Then when they had made the whole place quite clean and orderly, they took the women out and hemmed them in the narrow space between the wall of the domed room and that of the yard, so that they could not get away: and Telemachus said to the other two, “I shall not let these women die a clean death, for they were insolent to me and my mother, and used to sleep with the suitors.” So saying he made a ship’s cable fast to one of the bearing-posts that supported the roof of the domed room, and secured it all around the building, at a good height, lest any of the women’s feet should touch the ground; and as thrushes or doves beat against a net that has been set for them in a thicket just as they were getting to their nest, and a terrible fate awaits them, even so did the women have to put their heads in nooses one after the other and die most miserably.178 Their feet moved convulsively for a while, but not for very long.
As for Melanthius, they took him through the cloister into the inner court.
There they cut off his nose and his ears; they drew out his vitals and gave them to the dogs raw, and then in their fury they cut off his hands and his feet.
When they had done this they washed their hands and feet and went back into the house, for all was now over; and Ulysses said to the dear old nurse Euryclea, “Bring me sulphur, which cleanses all pollution, and fetch fire also that I may burn it, and purify the cloisters.
Go, moreover, and tell Penelope to come here with her attendants, and also all the maidservants that are in the house.” “All that you have said is true,” answered Euryclea, “but let me bring you some clean clothes—a shirt and cloak.
Do not keep these rags on your back any longer.
It is not right.” “First light me a fire,” replied Ulysses.
She brought the fire and sulphur, as he had bidden her, and Ulysses thoroughly purified the cloisters and both the inner and outer courts.
Then she went inside to call the women and tell them what had happened; whereon they came from their apartment with torches in their hands, and pressed round Ulysses to embrace him, kissing his head and shoulders and taking hold of his hands.
It made him feel as if he should like to weep, for he remembered every one of them.179 BOOK XXIII PENELOPE EVENTUALLY RECOGNISES HER HUSBAND—EARLY IN THE MORNING ULYSSES, TELEMACHUS, EUMAEUS, AND PHILOETIUS LEAVE THE TOWN.
Euryclea now went upstairs laughing to tell her mistress that her dear husband had come home.
Her aged knees became young again and her feet were nimble for joy as she went up to her mistress and bent over her head to speak to her.
“Wake up Penelope, my dear child,” she exclaimed, “and see with your own eyes something that you have been wanting this long time past.
Ulysses has at last indeed come home again, and has killed the suitors who were giving so much trouble in his house, eating up his estate and ill treating his son.” “My good nurse,” answered Penelope, “you must be mad.
The gods sometimes send some very sensible people out of their minds, and make foolish people become sensible.
This is what they must have been doing to you; for you always used to be a reasonable person.
Why should you thus mock me when I have trouble enough already—talking such nonsense, and waking me up out of a sweet sleep that had taken possession of my eyes and closed them?
I have never slept so soundly from the day my poor husband went to that city with the ill-omened name.
Go back again into the women’s room; if it had been any one else who had woke me up to bring me such absurd news I should have sent her away with a severe scolding.
As it is your age shall protect you.” “My dear child,” answered Euryclea, “I am not mocking you.
It is quite true as I tell you that Ulysses is come home again.
He was the stranger whom they all kept on treating so badly in the cloister.
Telemachus knew all the time that he was come back, but kept his father’s secret that he might have his revenge on all these wicked people.” Then Penelope sprang up from her couch, threw her arms round Euryclea, and wept for joy.
“But my dear nurse,” said she, “explain this to me; if he has really come home as you say, how did he manage to overcome the wicked suitors single handed, seeing what a number of them there always were?” “I was not there,” answered Euryclea, “and do not know; I only heard them groaning while they were being killed.
We sat crouching and huddled up in a corner of the women’s room with the doors closed, till your son came to fetch me because his father sent him.
Then I found Ulysses standing over the corpses that were lying on the ground all round him, one on top of the other.
You would have enjoyed it if you could have seen him standing there all bespattered with blood and filth, and looking just like a lion.
But the corpses are now all piled up in the gatehouse that is in the outer court, and Ulysses has lit a great fire to purify the house with sulphur.
He has sent me to call you, so come with me that you may both be happy together after all; for now at last the desire of your heart has been fulfilled; your husband is come home to find both wife and son alive and well, and to take his revenge in his own house on the suitors who behaved so badly to him.” “My dear nurse,” said Penelope, “do not exult too confidently over all this.
You know how delighted every one would be to see Ulysses come home—more particularly myself, and the son who has been born to both of us; but what you tell me cannot be really true.
It is some god who is angry with the suitors for their great wickedness, and has made an end of them; for they respected no man in the whole world, neither rich nor poor, who came near them, and they have come to a bad end in consequence of their iniquity; Ulysses is dead far away from the Achaean land; he will never return home again.” Then nurse Euryclea said, “My child, what are you talking about?
but you were all hard of belief and have made up your mind that your husband is never coming, although he is in the house and by his own fire side at this very moment.
Besides I can give you another proof; when I was washing him I perceived the scar which the wild boar gave him, and I wanted to tell you about it, but in his wisdom he would not let me, and clapped his hands over my mouth; so come with me and I will make this bargain with you—if I am deceiving you, you may have me killed by the most cruel death you can think of.” “My dear nurse,” said Penelope, “however wise you may be you can hardly fathom the counsels of the gods.
Nevertheless, we will go in search of my son, that I may see the corpses of the suitors, and the man who has killed them.” On this she came down from her upper room, and while doing so she considered whether she should keep at a distance from her husband and question him, or whether she should at once go up to him and embrace him.
When, however, she had crossed the stone floor of the cloister, she sat down opposite Ulysses by the fire, against the wall at right angles180 [to that by which she had entered], while Ulysses sat near one of the bearing-posts, looking upon the ground, and waiting to see what his brave wife would say to him when she saw him.
For a long time she sat silent and as one lost in amazement.
At one moment she looked him full in the face, but then again directly, she was misled by his shabby clothes and failed to recognise him,181 till Telemachus began to reproach her and said: “Mother—but you are so hard that I cannot call you by such a name—why do you keep away from my father in this way?
Why do you not sit by his side and begin talking to him and asking him questions?
No other woman could bear to keep away from her husband when he had come back to her after twenty years of absence, and after having gone through so much; but your heart always was as hard as a stone.” Penelope answered, “My son, I am so lost in astonishment that I can find no words in which either to ask questions or to answer them.
I cannot even look him straight in the face.
Still, if he really is Ulysses come back to his own home again, we shall get to understand one another better by and by, for there are tokens with which we two are alone acquainted, and which are hidden from all others.” Ulysses smiled at this, and said to Telemachus, “Let your mother put me to any proof she likes; she will make up her mind about it presently.
She rejects me for the moment and believes me to be somebody else, because I am covered with dirt and have such bad clothes on; let us, however, consider what we had better do next.
When one man has killed another—even though he was not one who would leave many friends to take up his quarrel—the man who has killed him must still say good bye to his friends and fly the country; whereas we have been killing the stay of a whole town, and all the picked youth of Ithaca.
I would have you consider this matter.” “Look to it yourself, father,” answered Telemachus, “for they say you are the wisest counsellor in the world, and that there is no other mortal man who can compare with you.
We will follow you with right good will, nor shall you find us fail you in so far as our strength holds out.” “I will say what I think will be best,” answered Ulysses.
“First wash and put your shirts on; tell the maids also to go to their own room and dress; Phemius shall then strike up a dance tune on his lyre, so that if people outside hear, or any of the neighbours, or some one going along the street happens to notice it, they may think there is a wedding in the house, and no rumours about the death of the suitors will get about in the town, before we can escape to the woods upon my own land.
Once there, we will settle which of the courses heaven vouchsafes us shall seem wisest.” Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said.
First they washed and put their shirts on, while the women got ready.
Then Phemius took his lyre and set them all longing for sweet song and stately dance.
The house re-echoed with the sound of men and women dancing, and the people outside said, “I suppose the queen has been getting married at last.
She ought to be ashamed of herself for not continuing to protect her husband’s property until he comes home.”182 This was what they said, but they did not know what it was that had been happening.
The upper servant Eurynome washed and anointed Ulysses in his own house and gave him a shirt and cloak, while Minerva made him look taller and stronger than before; she also made the hair grow thick on the top of his head, and flow down in curls like hyacinth blossoms; she glorified him about the head and shoulders just as a skilful workman who has studied art of all kinds under Vulcan or Minerva—and his work is full of beauty—enriches a piece of silver plate by gilding it.
He came from the bath looking like one of the immortals, and sat down opposite his wife on the seat he had left.
“My dear,” said he, “heaven has endowed you with a heart more unyielding than woman ever yet had.
No other woman could bear to keep away from her husband when he had come back to her after twenty years of absence, and after having gone through so much.
But come, nurse, get a bed ready for me; I will sleep alone, for this woman has a heart as hard as iron.” “My dear,” answered Penelope, “I have no wish to set myself up, nor to depreciate you; but I am not struck by your appearance, for I very well remember what kind of a man you were when you set sail from Ithaca.
Nevertheless, Euryclea, take his bed outside the bed chamber that he himself built.
Bring the bed outside this room, and put bedding upon it with fleeces, good coverlets, and blankets.” She said this to try him, but Ulysses was very angry and said, “Wife, I am much displeased at what you have just been saying.
Who has been taking my bed from the place in which I left it?
He must have found it a hard task, no matter how skilled a workman he was, unless some god came and helped him to shift it.
There is no man living, however strong and in his prime, who could move it from its place, for it is a marvellous curiosity which I made with my very own hands.
There was a young olive growing within the precincts of the house, in full vigour, and about as thick as a bearing-post.
I built my room round this with strong walls of stone and a roof to cover them, and I made the doors strong and well-fitting.
Then I cut off the top boughs of the olive tree and left the stump standing.
This I dressed roughly from the root upwards and then worked with carpenter’s tools well and skilfully, straightening my work by drawing a line on the wood, and making it into a bed-prop.
I then bored a hole down the middle, and made it the centre-post of my bed, at which I worked till I had finished it, inlaying it with gold and silver; after this I stretched a hide of crimson leather from one side of it to the other.
So you see I know all about it, and I desire to learn whether it is still there, or whether any one has been removing it by cutting down the olive tree at its roots.” When she heard the sure proofs Ulysses now gave her, she fairly broke down.
She flew weeping to his side, flung her arms about his neck, and kissed him.
“Do not be angry with me Ulysses,” she cried, “you, who are the wisest of mankind.
We have suffered, both of us.
Heaven has denied us the happiness of spending our youth, and of growing old, together; do not then be aggrieved or take it amiss that I did not embrace you thus as soon as I saw you.
I have been shuddering all the time through fear that someone might come here and deceive me with a lying story; for there are many very wicked people going about.
Jove’s daughter Helen would never have yielded herself to a man from a foreign country, if she had known that the sons of Achaeans would come after her and bring her back.
Heaven put it in her heart to do wrong, and she gave no thought to that sin, which has been the source of all our sorrows.
Now, however, that you have convinced me by showing that you know all about our bed (which no human being has ever seen but you and I and a single maidservant, the daughter of Actor, who was given me by my father on my marriage, and who keeps the doors of our room) hard of belief though I have been I can mistrust no longer.” Then Ulysses in his turn melted, and wept as he clasped his dear and faithful wife to his bosom.
As the sight of land is welcome to men who are swimming towards the shore, when Neptune has wrecked their ship with the fury of his winds and waves; a few alone reach the land, and these, covered with brine, are thankful when they find themselves on firm ground and out of danger—even so was her husband welcome to her as she looked upon him, and she could not tear her two fair arms from about his neck.
Indeed they would have gone on indulging their sorrow till rosy-fingered morn appeared, had not Minerva determined otherwise, and held night back in the far west, while she would not suffer Dawn to leave Oceanus, nor to yoke the two steeds Lampus and Phaethon that bear her onward to break the day upon mankind.
At last, however, Ulysses said, “Wife, we have not yet reached the end of our troubles.
I have an unknown amount of toil still to undergo.
It is long and difficult, but I must go through with it, for thus the shade of Teiresias prophesied concerning me, on the day when I went down into Hades to ask about my return and that of my companions.
But now let us go to bed, that we may lie down and enjoy the blessed boon of sleep.” “You shall go to bed as soon as you please,” replied Penelope, “now that the gods have sent you home to your own good house and to your country.
But as heaven has put it in your mind to speak of it, tell me about the task that lies before you.
I shall have to hear about it later, so it is better that I should be told at once.” “My dear,” answered Ulysses, “why should you press me to tell you?
Still, I will not conceal it from you, though you will not like it.
I do not like it myself, for Teiresias bade me travel far and wide, carrying an oar, till I came to a country where the people have never heard of the sea, and do not even mix salt with their food.
They know nothing about ships, nor oars that are as the wings of a ship.
He gave me this certain token which I will not hide from you.
He said that a wayfarer should meet me and ask me whether it was a winnowing shovel that I had on my shoulder.
On this, I was to fix my oar in the ground and sacrifice a ram, a bull, and a boar to Neptune; after which I was to go home and offer hecatombs to all the gods in heaven, one after the other.
As for myself, he said that death should come to me from the sea, and that my life should ebb away very gently when I was full of years and peace of mind, and my people should bless me.
All this, he said, should surely come to pass.” And Penelope said, “If the gods are going to vouchsafe you a happier time in your old age, you may hope then to have some respite from misfortune.” Thus did they converse.
Meanwhile Eurynome and the nurse took torches and made the bed ready with soft coverlets; as soon as they had laid them, the nurse went back into the house to go to her rest, leaving the bed chamber woman Eurynome183 to show Ulysses and Penelope to bed by torch light.
When she had conducted them to their room she went back, and they then came joyfully to the rites of their own old bed.
Telemachus, Philoetius, and the swineherd now left off dancing, and made the women leave off also.
They then laid themselves down to sleep in the cloisters.
When Ulysses and Penelope had had their fill of love they fell talking with one another.
She told him how much she had had to bear in seeing the house filled with a crowd of wicked suitors who had killed so many sheep and oxen on her account, and had drunk so many casks of wine.
Ulysses in his turn told her what he had suffered, and how much trouble he had himself given to other people.
He told her everything, and she was so delighted to listen that she never went to sleep till he had ended his whole story.
He began with his victory over the Cicons, and how he thence reached the fertile land of the Lotus-eaters.
He told her all about the Cyclops and how he had punished him for having so ruthlessly eaten his brave comrades; how he then went on to Aeolus, who received him hospitably and furthered him on his way, but even so he was not to reach home, for to his great grief a hurricane carried him out to sea again; how he went on to the Laestrygonian city Telepylos, where the people destroyed all his ships with their crews, save himself and his own ship only.
Then he told of cunning Circe and her craft, and how he sailed to the chill house of Hades, to consult the ghost of the Theban prophet Teiresias, and how he saw his old comrades in arms, and his mother who bore him and brought him up when he was a child; how he then heard the wondrous singing of the Sirens, and went on to the wandering rocks and terrible Charybdis and to Scylla, whom no man had ever yet passed in safety; how his men then ate the cattle of the sun-god, and how Jove therefore struck the ship with his thunderbolts, so that all his men perished together, himself alone being left alive; how at last he reached the Ogygian island and the nymph Calypso, who kept him there in a cave, and fed him, and wanted him to marry her, in which case she intended making him immortal so that he should never grow old, but she could not persuade him to let her do so; and how after much suffering he had found his way to the Phaeacians, who had treated him as though he had been a god, and sent him back in a ship to his own country after having given him gold, bronze, and raiment in great abundance.
This was the last thing about which he told her, for here a deep sleep took hold upon him and eased the burden of his sorrows.
Then Minerva bethought her of another matter.
When she deemed that Ulysses had had both of his wife and of repose, she bade gold-enthroned Dawn rise out of Oceanus that she might shed light upon mankind.
On this, Ulysses rose from his comfortable bed and said to Penelope, “Wife, we have both of us had our full share of troubles, you, here, in lamenting my absence, and I in being prevented from getting home though I was longing all the time to do so.
Now, however, that we have at last come together, take care of the property that is in the house.
As for the sheep and goats which the wicked suitors have eaten, I will take many myself by force from other people, and will compel the Achaeans to make good the rest till they shall have filled all my yards.
I am now going to the wooded lands out in the country to see my father who has so long been grieved on my account, and to yourself I will give these instructions, though you have little need of them.
At sunrise it will at once get abroad that I have been killing the suitors; go upstairs, therefore,184 and stay there with your women.
See nobody and ask no questions.”185 As he spoke he girded on his armour.
Then he roused Telemachus, Philoetius, and Eumaeus, and told them all to put on their armour also.
This they did, and armed themselves.
When they had done so, they opened the gates and sallied forth, Ulysses leading the way.
It was now daylight, but Minerva nevertheless concealed them in darkness and led them quickly out of the town.
BOOK XXIV THE GHOSTS OF THE SUITORS IN HADES—ULYSSES AND HIS MEN GO TO THE HOUSE OF LAERTES—THE PEOPLE OF ITHACA COME OUT TO ATTACK ULYSSES, BUT MINERVA CONCLUDES A PEACE.
Then Mercury of Cyllene summoned the ghosts of the suitors, and in his hand he held the fair golden wand with which he seals men’s eyes in sleep or wakes them just as he pleases; with this he roused the ghosts and led them, while they followed whining and gibbering behind him.
As bats fly squealing in the hollow of some great cave, when one of them has fallen out of the cluster in which they hang, even so did the ghosts whine and squeal as Mercury the healer of sorrow led them down into the dark abode of death.
When they had passed the waters of Oceanus and the rock Leucas, they came to the gates of the sun and the land of dreams, whereon they reached the meadow of asphodel where dwell the souls and shadows of them that can labour no more.
Here they found the ghost of Achilles son of Peleus, with those of Patroclus, Antilochus, and Ajax, who was the finest and handsomest man of all the Danaans after the son of Peleus himself.
They gathered round the ghost of the son of Peleus, and the ghost of Agamemnon joined them, sorrowing bitterly.
Round him were gathered also the ghosts of those who had perished with him in the house of Aegisthus; and the ghost of Achilles spoke first.
“Son of Atreus,” it said, “we used to say that Jove had loved you better from first to last than any other hero, for you were captain over many and brave men, when we were all fighting together before Troy; yet the hand of death, which no mortal can escape, was laid upon you all too early.
Better for you had you fallen at Troy in the hey-day of your renown, for the Achaeans would have built a mound over your ashes, and your son would have been heir to your good name, whereas it has now been your lot to come to a most miserable end.” “Happy son of Peleus,” answered the ghost of Agamemnon, “for having died at Troy far from Argos, while the bravest of the Trojans and the Achaeans fell round you fighting for your body.
There you lay in the whirling clouds of dust, all huge and hugely, heedless now of your chivalry.
We fought the whole of the livelong day, nor should we ever have left off if Jove had not sent a hurricane to stay us.
Then, when we had borne you to the ships out of the fray, we laid you on your bed and cleansed your fair skin with warm water and with ointments.
The Danaans tore their hair and wept bitterly round about you.
Your mother, when she heard, came with her immortal nymphs from out of the sea, and the sound of a great wailing went forth over the waters so that the Achaeans quaked for fear.
They would have fled panic-stricken to their ships had not wise old Nestor whose counsel was ever truest checked them saying, ‘Hold, Argives, fly not sons of the Achaeans, this is his mother coming from the sea with her immortal nymphs to view the body of her son.’ “Thus he spoke, and the Achaeans feared no more.
The daughters of the old man of the sea stood round you weeping bitterly, and clothed you in immortal raiment.
The nine muses also came and lifted up their sweet voices in lament—calling and answering one another; there was not an Argive but wept for pity of the dirge they chaunted.
Days and nights seven and ten we mourned you, mortals and immortals, but on the eighteenth day we gave you to the flames, and many a fat sheep with many an ox did we slay in sacrifice around you.
You were burnt in raiment of the gods, with rich resins and with honey, while heroes, horse and foot, clashed their armour round the pile as you were burning, with the tramp as of a great multitude.
But when the flames of heaven had done their work, we gathered your white bones at daybreak and laid them in ointments and in pure wine.
Your mother brought us a golden vase to hold them—gift of Bacchus, and work of Vulcan himself; in this we mingled your bleached bones with those of Patroclus who had gone before you, and separate we enclosed also those of Antilochus, who had been closer to you than any other of your comrades now that Patroclus was no more.
“Over these the host of the Argives built a noble tomb, on a point jutting out over the open Hellespont, that it might be seen from far out upon the sea by those now living and by them that shall be born hereafter.
Your mother begged prizes from the gods, and offered them to be contended for by the noblest of the Achaeans.
You must have been present at the funeral of many a hero, when the young men gird themselves and make ready to contend for prizes on the death of some great chieftain, but you never saw such prizes as silver-footed Thetis offered in your honour; for the gods loved you well.
Thus even in death your fame, Achilles, has not been lost, and your name lives evermore among all mankind.
But as for me, what solace had I when the days of my fighting were done?
For Jove willed my destruction on my return, by the hands of Aegisthus and those of my wicked wife.” Thus did they converse, and presently Mercury came up to them with the ghosts of the suitors who had been killed by Ulysses.
The ghosts of Agamemnon and Achilles were astonished at seeing them, and went up to them at once.
The ghost of Agamemnon recognised Amphimedon son of Melaneus, who lived in Ithaca and had been his host, so it began to talk to him.
“Amphimedon,” it said, “what has happened to all you fine young men—all of an age too—that you are come down here under the ground?
One could pick no finer body of men from any city.
Did Neptune raise his winds and waves against you when you were at sea, or did your enemies make an end of you on the mainland when you were cattle-lifting or sheep-stealing, or while fighting in defence of their wives and city?
Answer my question, for I have been your guest.
Do you not remember how I came to your house with Menelaus, to persuade Ulysses to join us with his ships against Troy?
It was a whole month ere we could resume our voyage, for we had hard work to persuade Ulysses to come with us.” And the ghost of Amphimedon answered, “Agamemnon, son of Atreus, king of men, I remember everything that you have said, and will tell you fully and accurately about the way in which our end was brought about.
Ulysses had been long gone, and we were courting his wife, who did not say point blank that she would not marry, nor yet bring matters to an end, for she meant to compass our destruction: this, then, was the trick she played us.
She set up a great tambour frame in her room and began to work on an enormous piece of fine needlework.
‘Sweethearts,’ said she, ‘Ulysses is indeed dead, still, do not press me to marry again immediately; wait—for I would not have my skill in needlework perish unrecorded—till I have completed a pall for the hero Laertes, against the time when death shall take him.
He is very rich, and the women of the place will talk if he is laid out without a pall.’ This is what she said, and we assented; whereupon we could see her working upon her great web all day long, but at night she would unpick the stitches again by torchlight.
She fooled us in this way for three years without our finding it out, but as time wore on and she was now in her fourth year, in the waning of moons and many days had been accomplished, one of her maids who knew what she was doing told us, and we caught her in the act of undoing her work, so she had to finish it whether she would or no; and when she showed us the robe she had made, after she had had it washed,186 its splendour was as that of the sun or moon.
“Then some malicious god conveyed Ulysses to the upland farm where his swineherd lives.
Thither presently came also his son, returning from a voyage to Pylos, and the two came to the town when they had hatched their plot for our destruction.
Telemachus came first, and then after him, accompanied by the swineherd, came Ulysses, clad in rags and leaning on a staff as though he were some miserable old beggar.
He came so unexpectedly that none of us knew him, not even the older ones among us, and we reviled him and threw things at him.
He endured both being struck and insulted without a word, though he was in his own house; but when the will of Aegis-bearing Jove inspired him, he and Telemachus took the armour and hid it in an inner chamber, bolting the doors behind them.
Then he cunningly made his wife offer his bow and a quantity of iron to be contended for by us ill-fated suitors; and this was the beginning of our end, for not one of us could string the bow—nor nearly do so.
When it was about to reach the hands of Ulysses, we all of us shouted out that it should not be given him, no matter what he might say, but Telemachus insisted on his having it.
When he had got it in his hands he strung it with ease and sent his arrow through the iron.
Then he stood on the floor of the cloister and poured his arrows on the ground, glaring fiercely about him.
First he killed Antinous, and then, aiming straight before him, he let fly his deadly darts and they fell thick on one another.
It was plain that some one of the gods was helping them, for they fell upon us with might and main throughout the cloisters, and there was a hideous sound of groaning as our brains were being battered in, and the ground seethed with our blood.
This, Agamemnon, is how we came by our end, and our bodies are lying still uncared for in the house of Ulysses, for our friends at home do not yet know what has happened, so that they cannot lay us out and wash the black blood from our wounds, making moan over us according to the offices due to the departed.” “Happy Ulysses, son of Laertes,” replied the ghost of Agamemnon, “you are indeed blessed in the possession of a wife endowed with such rare excellence of understanding, and so faithful to her wedded lord as Penelope the daughter of Icarius.
The fame, therefore, of her virtue shall never die, and the immortals shall compose a song that shall be welcome to all mankind in honour of the constancy of Penelope.
How far otherwise was the wickedness of the daughter of Tyndareus who killed her lawful husband; her song shall be hateful among men, for she has brought disgrace on all womankind even on the good ones.” Thus did they converse in the house of Hades deep down within the bowels of the earth.
Meanwhile Ulysses and the others passed out of the town and soon reached the fair and well-tilled farm of Laertes, which he had reclaimed with infinite labour.
Here was his house, with a lean-to running all round it, where the slaves who worked for him slept and sat and ate, while inside the house there was an old Sicel woman, who looked after him in this his country-farm.
When Ulysses got there, he said to his son and to the other two: “Go to the house, and kill the best pig that you can find for dinner.
Meanwhile I want to see whether my father will know me, or fail to recognise me after so long an absence.” He then took off his armour and gave it to Eumaeus and Philoetius, who went straight on to the house, while he turned off into the vineyard to make trial of his father.
As he went down into the great orchard, he did not see Dolius, nor any of his sons nor of the other bondsmen, for they were all gathering thorns to make a fence for the vineyard, at the place where the old man had told them; he therefore found his father alone, hoeing a vine.
He had on a dirty old shirt, patched and very shabby; his legs were bound round with thongs of oxhide to save him from the brambles, and he also wore sleeves of leather; he had a goat skin cap on his head, and was looking very woe-begone.
When Ulysses saw him so worn, so old and full of sorrow, he stood still under a tall pear tree and began to weep.
He doubted whether to embrace him, kiss him, and tell him all about his having come home, or whether he should first question him and see what he would say.
In the end he deemed it best to be crafty with him, so in this mind he went up to his father, who was bending down and digging about a plant.
“I see, sir,” said Ulysses, “that you are an excellent gardener—what pains you take with it, to be sure.
There is not a single plant, not a fig tree, vine, olive, pear, nor flower bed, but bears the trace of your attention.
I trust, however, that you will not be offended if I say that you take better care of your garden than of yourself.
You are old, unsavoury, and very meanly clad.
It cannot be because you are idle that your master takes such poor care of you, indeed your face and figure have nothing of the slave about them, and proclaim you of noble birth.
I should have said that you were one of those who should wash well, eat well, and lie soft at night as old men have a right to do; but tell me, and tell me true, whose bondman are you, and in whose garden are you working?
Tell me also about another matter.
Is this place that I have come to really Ithaca?
I met a man just now who said so, but he was a dull fellow, and had not the patience to hear my story out when I was asking him about an old friend of mine, whether he was still living, or was already dead and in the house of Hades.
Believe me when I tell you that this man came to my house once when I was in my own country and never yet did any stranger come to me whom I liked better.
He said that his family came from Ithaca and that his father was Laertes, son of Arceisius.
I received him hospitably, making him welcome to all the abundance of my house, and when he went away I gave him all customary presents.
I gave him seven talents of fine gold, and a cup of solid silver with flowers chased upon it.
I gave him twelve light cloaks, and as many pieces of tapestry; I also gave him twelve cloaks of single fold, twelve rugs, twelve fair mantles, and an equal number of shirts.
To all this I added four good looking women skilled in all useful arts, and I let him take his choice.” His father shed tears and answered, “Sir, you have indeed come to the country that you have named, but it is fallen into the hands of wicked people.
All this wealth of presents has been given to no purpose.
If you could have found your friend here alive in Ithaca, he would have entertained you hospitably and would have requited your presents amply when you left him—as would have been only right considering what you had already given him.
But tell me, and tell me true, how many years is it since you entertained this guest—my unhappy son, as ever was?
Alas!
He has perished far from his own country; the fishes of the sea have eaten him, or he has fallen a prey to the birds and wild beasts of some continent.
Neither his mother, nor I his father, who were his parents, could throw our arms about him and wrap him in his shroud, nor could his excellent and richly dowered wife Penelope bewail her husband as was natural upon his death bed, and close his eyes according to the offices due to the departed.
But now, tell me truly for I want to know.
Who and whence are you—tell me of your town and parents?
Where is the ship lying that has brought you and your men to Ithaca?
Or were you a passenger on some other man’s ship, and those who brought you here have gone on their way and left you?” “I will tell you everything,” answered Ulysses, “quite truly.
I come from Alybas, where I have a fine house.
I am son of king Apheidas, who is the son of Polypemon.
My own name is Eperitus; heaven drove me off my course as I was leaving Sicania, and I have been carried here against my will.
As for my ship it is lying over yonder, off the open country outside the town, and this is the fifth year since Ulysses left my country.
Poor fellow, yet the omens were good for him when he left me.
The birds all flew on our right hands, and both he and I rejoiced to see them as we parted, for we had every hope that we should have another friendly meeting and exchange presents.” A dark cloud of sorrow fell upon Laertes as he listened.
He filled both hands with the dust from off the ground and poured it over his grey head, groaning heavily as he did so.
The heart of Ulysses was touched, and his nostrils quivered as he looked upon his father; then he sprang towards him, flung his arms about him and kissed him, saying, “I am he, father, about whom you are asking—I have returned after having been away for twenty years.
But cease your sighing and lamentation—we have no time to lose, for I should tell you that I have been killing the suitors in my house, to punish them for their insolence and crimes.” “If you really are my son Ulysses,” replied Laertes, “and have come back again, you must give me such manifest proof of your identity as shall convince me.” “First observe this scar,” answered Ulysses, “which I got from a boar’s tusk when I was hunting on Mt.
Parnassus.
You and my mother had sent me to Autolycus, my mother’s father, to receive the presents which when he was over here he had promised to give me.
Furthermore I will point out to you the trees in the vineyard which you gave me, and I asked you all about them as I followed you round the garden.
We went over them all, and you told me their names and what they all were.
You gave me thirteen pear trees, ten apple trees, and forty fig trees; you also said you would give me fifty rows of vines; there was corn planted between each row, and they yield grapes of every kind when the heat of heaven has been laid heavy upon them.” Laertes’ strength failed him when he heard the convincing proofs which his son had given him.
He threw his arms about him, and Ulysses had to support him, or he would have gone off into a swoon; but as soon as he came to, and was beginning to recover his senses, he said, “O father Jove, then you gods are still in Olympus after all, if the suitors have really been punished for their insolence and folly.
Nevertheless, I am much afraid that I shall have all the townspeople of Ithaca up here directly, and they will be sending messengers everywhere throughout the cities of the Cephallenians.” Ulysses answered, “Take heart and do not trouble yourself about that, but let us go into the house hard by your garden.
I have already told Telemachus, Philoetius, and Eumaeus to go on there and get dinner ready as soon as possible.” Thus conversing the two made their way towards the house.
When they got there they found Telemachus with the stockman and the swineherd cutting up meat and mixing wine with water.
Then the old Sicel woman took Laertes inside and washed him and anointed him with oil.
She put him on a good cloak, and Minerva came up to him and gave him a more imposing presence, making him taller and stouter than before.
When he came back his son was surprised to see him looking so like an immortal, and said to him, “My dear father, some one of the gods has been making you much taller and better-looking.” Laertes answered, “Would, by Father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, that I were the man I was when I ruled among the Cephallenians, and took Nericum, that strong fortress on the foreland.
If I were still what I then was and had been in our house yesterday with my armour on, I should have been able to stand by you and help you against the suitors.
I should have killed a great many of them, and you would have rejoiced to see it.” Thus did they converse; but the others, when they had finished their work and the feast was ready, left off working, and took each his proper place on the benches and seats.
Then they began eating; by and by old Dolius and his sons left their work and came up, for their mother, the Sicel woman who looked after Laertes now that he was growing old, had been to fetch them.
When they saw Ulysses and were certain it was he, they stood there lost in astonishment; but Ulysses scolded them good naturedly and said, “Sit down to your dinner, old man, and never mind about your surprise; we have been wanting to begin for some time and have been waiting for you.” Then Dolius put out both his hands and went up to Ulysses.
“Sir,” said he, seizing his master’s hand and kissing it at the wrist, “we have long been wishing you home: and now heaven has restored you to us after we had given up hoping.
All hail, therefore, and may the gods prosper you.187 But tell me, does Penelope already know of your return, or shall we send some one to tell her?” “Old man,” answered Ulysses, “she knows already, so you need not trouble about that.” On this he took his seat, and the sons of Dolius gathered round Ulysses to give him greeting and embrace him one after the other; then they took their seats in due order near Dolius their father.
While they were thus busy getting their dinner ready, Rumour went round the town, and noised abroad the terrible fate that had befallen the suitors; as soon, therefore, as the people heard of it they gathered from every quarter, groaning and hooting before the house of Ulysses.
They took the dead away, buried every man his own, and put the bodies of those who came from elsewhere on board the fishing vessels, for the fishermen to take each of them to his own place.
They then met angrily in the place of assembly, and when they were got together Eupeithes rose to speak.
He was overwhelmed with grief for the death of his son Antinous, who had been the first man killed by Ulysses, so he said, weeping bitterly, “My friends, this man has done the Achaeans great wrong.
He took many of our best men away with him in his fleet, and he has lost both ships and men; now, moreover, on his return he has been killing all the foremost men among the Cephallenians.
Let us be up and doing before he can get away to Pylos or to Elis where the Epeans rule, or we shall be ashamed of ourselves for ever afterwards.
It will be an everlasting disgrace to us if we do not avenge the murder of our sons and brothers.
For my own part I should have no more pleasure in life, but had rather die at once.
Let us be up, then, and after them, before they can cross over to the main land.” He wept as he spoke and every one pitied him.
But Medon and the bard Phemius had now woke up, and came to them from the house of Ulysses.
Every one was astonished at seeing them, but they stood in the middle of the assembly, and Medon said, “Hear me, men of Ithaca.
Ulysses did not do these things against the will of heaven.
I myself saw an immortal god take the form of Mentor and stand beside him.
This god appeared, now in front of him encouraging him, and now going furiously about the court and attacking the suitors whereon they fell thick on one another.” On this pale fear laid hold of them, and old Halitherses, son of Mastor, rose to speak, for he was the only man among them who knew both past and future; so he spoke to them plainly and in all honesty, saying, “Men of Ithaca, it is all your own fault that things have turned out as they have; you would not listen to me, nor yet to Mentor, when we bade you check the folly of your sons who were doing much wrong in the wantonness of their hearts—wasting the substance and dishonouring the wife of a chieftain who they thought would not return.
Now, however, let it be as I say, and do as I tell you.
Do not go out against Ulysses, or you may find that you have been drawing down evil on your own heads.” This was what he said, and more than half raised a loud shout, and at once left the assembly.
But the rest stayed where they were, for the speech of Halitherses displeased them, and they sided with Eupeithes; they therefore hurried off for their armour, and when they had armed themselves, they met together in front of the city, and Eupeithes led them on in their folly.
He thought he was going to avenge the murder of his son, whereas in truth he was never to return, but was himself to perish in his attempt.
Then Minerva said to Jove, “Father, son of Saturn, king of kings, answer me this question—What do you propose to do?
Will you set them fighting still further, or will you make peace between them?” And Jove answered, “My child, why should you ask me?
Was it not by your own arrangement that Ulysses came home and took his revenge upon the suitors?
Do whatever you like, but I will tell you what I think will be most reasonable arrangement.
Now that Ulysses is revenged, let them swear to a solemn covenant, in virtue of which he shall continue to rule, while we cause the others to forgive and forget the massacre of their sons and brothers.
Let them then all become friends as heretofore, and let peace and plenty reign.” This was what Minerva was already eager to bring about, so down she darted from off the topmost summits of Olympus.
Now when Laertes and the others had done dinner, Ulysses began by saying, “Some of you go out and see if they are not getting close up to us.” So one of Dolius’s sons went as he was bid.
Standing on the threshold he could see them all quite near, and said to Ulysses, “Here they are, let us put on our armour at once.” They put on their armour as fast as they could—that is to say Ulysses, his three men, and the six sons of Dolius.
Laertes also and Dolius did the same—warriors by necessity in spite of their grey hair.
When they had all put on their armour, they opened the gate and sallied forth, Ulysses leading the way.
Then Jove’s daughter Minerva came up to them, having assumed the form and voice of Mentor.
Ulysses was glad when he saw her, and said to his son Telemachus, “Telemachus, now that you are about to fight in an engagement, which will show every man’s mettle, be sure not to disgrace your ancestors, who were eminent for their strength and courage all the world over.” “You say truly, my dear father,” answered Telemachus, “and you shall see, if you will, that I am in no mind to disgrace your family.” Laertes was delighted when he heard this.
“Good heavens,” he exclaimed, “what a day I am enjoying: I do indeed rejoice at it.
My son and grandson are vying with one another in the matter of valour.” On this Minerva came close up to him and said, “Son of Arceisius—-best friend I have in the world—pray to the blue-eyed damsel, and to Jove her father; then poise your spear and hurl it.” As she spoke she infused fresh vigour into him, and when he had prayed to her he poised his spear and hurled it.
He hit Eupeithes’ helmet, and the spear went right through it, for the helmet stayed it not, and his armour rang rattling round him as he fell heavily to the ground.
Meantime Ulysses and his son fell upon the front line of the foe and smote them with their swords and spears; indeed, they would have killed every one of them, and prevented them from ever getting home again, only Minerva raised her voice aloud, and made every one pause.
“Men of Ithaca,” she cried, “cease this dreadful war, and settle the matter at once without further bloodshed.” On this pale fear seized every one; they were so frightened that their arms dropped from their hands and fell upon the ground at the sound of the goddess’ voice, and they fled back to the city for their lives.
But Ulysses gave a great cry, and gathering himself together swooped down like a soaring eagle.
Then the son of Saturn sent a thunderbolt of fire that fell just in front of Minerva, so she said to Ulysses, “Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, stop this warful strife, or Jove will be angry with you.” Thus spoke Minerva, and Ulysses obeyed her gladly.
Then Minerva assumed the form and voice of Mentor, and presently made a covenant of peace between the two contending parties.
FOOTNOTES: [1] [ Black races are evidently known to the writer as stretching all across Africa, one half looking West on to the Atlantic, and the other East on to the Indian Ocean.]
[2] [ The original use of the footstool was probably less to rest the feet than to keep them (especially when bare) from a floor which was often wet and dirty.]
[3] [ The θρόνος or seat, is occasionally called “high,” as being higher than the θρῆνυς or low footstool.
It was probably no higher than an ordinary chair is now, and seems to have had no back.]
[4] [ Temesa was on the West Coast of the toe of Italy, in what is now the gulf of Sta Eufemia.
It was famous in remote times for its copper mines, which, however, were worked out when Strabo wrote.]
[5] [ i.e.
“with a current in it”—see illustrations and map near the end of bks.
v. and vi.
respectively.]
[6] [ Reading Νηρίτῳ for Νηίῳ, cf.
“Od.” iii.
81 where the same mistake is made, and xiii.
351 where the mountain is called Neritum, the same place being intended both here and in book xiii.]
[7] [ It is never plausibly explained why Penelope cannot do this, and from bk.
ii.
it is clear that she kept on deliberately encouraging the suitors, though we are asked to believe that she was only fooling them.]
[8] [ See note on “Od.” i.
365.]
[9] [ Middle Argos means the Peleponnese which, however, is never so called in the “Iliad”.
I presume “middle” means “middle between the two Greek-speaking countries of Asia Minor and Sicily, with South Italy”; for that parts of Sicily and also large parts, though not the whole of South Italy, were inhabited by Greek-speaking races centuries before the Dorian colonisations can hardly be doubted.
The Sicians, and also the Sicels, both of them probably spoke Greek.]
[10] [ cf.
“Il.” vi.
490-495.
In the “Iliad” it is “war,” not “speech,” that is a man’s matter.
It argues a certain hardness, or at any rate dislike of the “Iliad” on the part of the writer of the “Odyssey,” that she should have adopted Hector’s farewell to Andromache here, as elsewhere in the poem, for a scene of such inferior pathos.]
[11] [ μέγαρα σκιοέντα The whole open court with the covered cloister running round it was called μέγαρον, or μέγαρα, but the covered part was distinguished by being called “shady” or “shadow-giving”.
It was in this part that the tables for the suitors were laid.
The Fountain Court at Hampton Court may serve as an illustration (save as regards the use of arches instead of wooden supports and rafters) and the arrangement is still common in Sicily.
The usual translation “shadowy” or “dusky” halls, gives a false idea of the scene.]
[12] [ The reader will note the extreme care which the writer takes to make it clear that none of the suitors were allowed to sleep in Ulysses’ house.]
[13] [ See Appendix; g, in plan of Ulysses’ house.]
[14] [ I imagine this passage to be a rejoinder to “Il.” xxiii.
702-705 in which a tripod is valued at twelve oxen, and a good useful maid of all work at only four.
The scrupulous regard of Laertes for his wife’s feelings is of a piece with the extreme jealousy for the honour of woman, which is manifest throughout the “Odyssey”.]
[15] [ χιτῶνα “The χιτών, or _tunica_, was a shirt or shift, and served as the chief under garment of the Greeks and Romans, whether men or women.” Smith’s Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities, under “Tunica”.]
[16] [ Doors fastened to all intents and purposes as here described may be seen in the older houses at Trapani.
There is a slot on the outer side of the door by means of which a person who has left the room can shoot the bolt.
My bedroom at the Albergo Centrale was fastened in this way.]
[17] [ πύματον δ’ ὡπλίσσατο δόρπον.
So we vulgarly say “had cooked his goose,” or “had settled his hash.” Ægyptius cannot of course know of the fate Antiphus had met with, for there had as yet been no news of or from Ulysses.]
[18] [ “Il.” xxii.
416. σχέσθε φίλοι, καὶ μ’ οἷον ἐάσατε......
The authoress has bungled by borrowing these words verbatim from the “Iliad”, without prefixing the necessary “do not,” which I have supplied.]
[19] [ i.e.
you have money, and could pay when I got judgment, whereas the suitors are men of straw.]
[20] [ cf.
“Il.” ii.
76. ἦ τοι ὄ γ’ ὦς εὶπὼν κατ’ ἄρ’ ἔζετο τοῖσι δ’ ἀνέστη Νέστωρ, ὄς ῥα....................................... ὄ σφιν ἐὺ φρονέων ἀγορήσατο καὶ μετέειπεν.
The Odyssean passage runs— “ἦ τοι ὄ γ’ ὦς εὶπὼν κατ’ ἄρ’ ἔζετο τοῖσι δ’ ἀνέστη Μεντορ ὄς ῥ’....................................... ὄ σφιν ἐὺ φρονέων ἀγορήσατο καὶ μετέειπεν.
Is it possible not to suspect that the name Mentor was coined upon that of Nestor?]
[21] [ i.e.
in the outer court, and in the uncovered part of the inner house.]
[22] [ This would be fair from Sicily, which was doing duty for Ithaca in the mind of the writer, but a North wind would have been preferable for a voyage from the real Ithaca to Pylos.]
[23] [ κελάδοντ’ ἐπὶ οὶνοπα πόντον The wind does not whistle over waves.
It only whistles through rigging or some other obstacle that cuts it.]
[24] [ cf.
“Il.” v.20.
Ἰδαῖος δ’ ἀπόρουσε λιπὼν περικαλλέα δίφρον, the Odyssean line is ἠέλιος δ’ ἀνόρουσε λιπὼν περικαλλέα λίμνην.
There can be no doubt that the Odyssean line was suggested by the Iliadic, but nothing can explain why Idæus jumping from his chariot should suggest to the writer of the “Odyssey” the sun jumping from the sea.
The probability is that she never gave the matter a thought, but took the line in question as an effect of saturation with the “Iliad,” and of unconscious cerebration.
The “Odyssey” contains many such examples.]
[25] [ The heart, liver, lights, kidneys, etc.
were taken out from the inside and eaten first as being more readily cooked; the {Greek}, or bone meat, was cooking while the {Greek} or inward parts were being eaten.
I imagine that the thigh bones made a kind of gridiron, while at the same time the marrow inside them got cooked.]
[26] [ i.e.
skewers, either single, double, or even five pronged.
The meat would be pierced with the skewer, and laid over the ashes to grill—the two ends of the skewer being supported in whatever way convenient.
Meat so cooking may be seen in any eating house in Smyrna, or any Eastern town.
When I rode across the Troad from the Dardanelles to Hissarlik and Mount Ida, I noticed that my dragoman and his men did all our outdoor cooking exactly in the Odyssean and Iliadic fashion.]
[27] [ cf.
“Il.” xvii.
567.
{Greek} The Odyssean lines are—{Greek}] [28] [ Reading {Greek} for {Greek}, cf.
“Od.” i.
186.]
29[] [ The geography of the Ægean as above described is correct, but is probably taken from the lost poem, the Nosti, the existence of which is referred to “Od.” i.
326, 327 and 350, &c. A glance at the map will show that heaven advised its supplicants quite correctly.]
[30] [ The writer—ever jealous for the honour of women—extenuates Clytemnestra’s guilt as far as possible, and explains it as due to her having been left unprotected, and fallen into the hands of a wicked man.]
[31] [ The Greek is {Greek} cf.
“Iliad” ii.
408 {Greek} Surely the {Greek} of the Odyssean passage was due to the {Greek} of the “Iliad.” No other reason suggests itself for the making Menelaus return on the very day of the feast given by Orestes.
The fact that in the “Iliad” Menelaus came to a banquet without waiting for an invitation, determines the writer of the “Odyssey” to make him come to a banquet, also uninvited, but as circumstances did not permit of his having been invited, his coming uninvited is shown to have been due to chance.
I do not think the authoress thought all this out, but attribute the strangeness of the coincidence to unconscious cerebration and saturation.]
[32] [ cf.
“Il.” I.
458, II.
421.
The writer here interrupts an Iliadic passage (to which she returns immediately) for the double purpose of dwelling upon the slaughter of the heifer, and of letting Nestor’s wife and daughter enjoy it also.
A male writer, if he was borrowing from the “Iliad,” would have stuck to his borrowing.]
[33] [ cf.
“Il.” xxiv.
587, 588 where the lines refer to the washing the dead body of Hector.]
[34] [ See illustration on opposite page.
The yard is typical of many that may be seen in Sicily.
The existing ground-plan is probably unmodified from Odyssean, and indeed long pre-Odyssean times, but the earlier buildings would have no arches, and would, one would suppose, be mainly timber.
The Odyssean {Greek} were the sheds that ran round the yard as the arches do now.
The {Greek} was the one through which the main entrance passed, and which was hence “noisy,” or reverberating.
It had an upper story in which visitors were often lodged.]
[35] [ This journey is an impossible one.
Telemachus and Pisistratus would have been obliged to drive over the Taygetus range, over which there has never yet been a road for wheeled vehicles.
It is plain therefore that the audience for whom the “Odyssey” was written was one that would be unlikely to know anything about the topography of the Peloponnese, so that the writer might take what liberties she chose.]
[36] [ The lines which I have enclosed in brackets are evidently an afterthought—added probably by the writer herself—for they evince the same instinctively greater interest in anything that may concern a woman, which is so noticeable throughout the poem.
There is no further sign of any special festivities nor of any other guests than Telemachus and Pisistratus, until lines 621-624 (ordinarily enclosed in brackets) are abruptly introduced, probably with a view of trying to carry off the introduction of the lines now in question.
The addition was, I imagine, suggested by a desire to excuse and explain the non-appearance of Hermione in bk.
xv., as also of both Hermione and Megapenthes in the rest of bk.
iv.
Megapenthes in bk.
xv.
seems to be still a bachelor: the presumption therefore is that bk.
xv.
was written before the story of his marriage here given.
I take it he is only married here because his sister is being married.
She having been properly attended to, Megapenthes might as well be married at the same time.
Hermione could not now be less than thirty.
I have dealt with this passage somewhat more fully in my “Authoress of the Odyssey”, p. 136-138.
See also p. 256 of the same book.]
[37] [ Sparta and Lacedaemon are here treated as two different places, though in other parts of the poem it is clear that the writer understands them as one.
The catalogue in the “Iliad,” which the writer is here presumably following, makes the same mistake (“Il.” ii.
581, 582)] [38] [ These last three lines are identical with “Il.” vxiii.
604-606.]
[39] [ From the Greek {Greek} it is plain that Menelaus took up the piece of meat with his fingers.]
[40] [ Amber is never mentioned in the “Iliad.” Sicily, where I suppose the “Odyssey” to have been written, has always been, and still is, one of the principal amber producing countries.
It was probably the only one known in the Odyssean age.
See “The Authoress of the Odyssey,” Longmans 1898, p.
186.]
[41] [ This no doubt refers to the story told in the last poem of the Cypria about Paris and Helen robbing Menelaus of the greater part of his treasures, when they sailed together for Troy.]
[42] [ It is inconceivable that Helen should enter thus, in the middle of supper, intending to work with her distaff, if great festivities were going on.
Telemachus and Pisistratus are evidently dining en famille.]
[43] [ In the Italian insurrection of 1848, eight young men who were being hotly pursued by the Austrian police hid themselves inside Donatello’s colossal wooden horse in the Salone at Padua, and remained there for a week being fed by their confederates.
In 1898 the last survivor was carried round Padua in triumph.]
[44] [ The Greek is {Greek}.
Is it unfair to argue that the writer is a person of somewhat delicate sensibility, to whom a strong smell of fish is distasteful?]
[45] [ The Greek is {Greek}.
I believe this to be a hit at the writer’s own countrymen who were of Phocaean descent, and the next following line to be a rejoinder to complaints made against her in bk.
vi.
273-288, to the effect that she gave herself airs and would marry none of her own people.
For that the writer of the “Odyssey” was the person who has been introduced into the poem under the name of Nausicaa, I cannot bring myself to question.
I may remind English readers that {Greek} (i.e.
phoca) means “seal.” Seals almost always appear on Phocaean coins.]
[46] [ Surely here again we are in the hands of a writer of delicate sensibility.
It is not as though the seals were stale; they had only just been killed.
The writer, however is obviously laughing at her own countrymen, and insulting them as openly as she dares.]
[47] [ We were told above (lines 356, 357) that it was only one day’s sail.]
[48] [ I give the usual translation, but I do not believe the Greek will warrant it.
The Greek reads {Greek}.
This is usually held to mean that Ithaca is an island fit for breeding goats, and on that account more delectable to the speaker than it would have been if it were fit for breeding horses.
I find little authority for such a translation; the most equitable translation of the text as it stands is, “Ithaca is an island fit for breeding goats, and delectable rather than fit for breeding horses; for not one of the islands is good driving ground, nor well meadowed.” Surely the writer does not mean that a pleasant or delectable island would not be fit for breeding horses?
The most equitable translation, therefore, of the present text being thus halt and impotent, we may suspect corruption, and I hazard the following emendation, though I have not adopted it in my translation, as fearing that it would be deemed too fanciful.
I would read:—{Greek}.
As far as scanning goes the {Greek} is not necessary; {Greek} iv.
72, (Footnote Greek) iv.
233, to go no further afield than earlier lines of the same book, give sufficient authority for {Greek}, but the {Greek} would not be redundant; it would emphasise the surprise of the contrast, and I should prefer to have it, though it is not very important either way.
This reading of course should be translated “Ithaca is an island fit for breeding goats, and (by your leave) itself a horseman rather than fit for breeding horses—for not one of the islands is good and well meadowed ground.” This would be sure to baffle the Alexandrian editors.
“How,” they would ask themselves, “could an island be a horseman?” and they would cast about for an emendation.
A visit to the top of Mt.
Eryx might perhaps make the meaning intelligible, and suggest my proposed restoration of the text to the reader as readily as it did to myself.
I have elsewhere stated my conviction that the writer of the “Odyssey” was familiar with the old Sican city at the top of Mt.
Eryx, and that the Aegadean islands which are so striking when seen thence did duty with her for the Ionian islands—Marettimo, the highest and most westerly of the group, standing for Ithaca.
When seen from the top of Mt.
Eryx Marettimo shows as it should do according to “Od.” ix.
25, 26, “on the horizon, all highest up in the sea towards the West,” while the other islands lie “some way off it to the East.” As we descend to Trapani, Marettimo appears to sink on to the top of the island of Levanzo, behind which it disappears.
My friend, the late Signor E. Biaggini, pointed to it once as it was just standing on the top of Levanzo, and said to me “Come cavalca bene” (“How well it rides”), and this immediately suggested my emendation to me.
Later on I found in the hymn to the Pythian Apollo (which abounds with tags taken from the “Odyssey”) a line ending {Greek} which strengthened my suspicion that this was the original ending of the second of the two lines above under consideration.]
[49] [ See note on line 3 of this book.
The reader will observe that the writer has been unable to keep the women out of an interpolation consisting only of four lines.]
[50] [ Scheria means a piece of land jutting out into the sea.
In my “Authoress of the Odyssey” I thought “Jutland” would be a suitable translation, but it has been pointed out to me that “Jutland” only means the land of the Jutes.]
[51] [ Irrigation as here described is common in gardens near Trapani.
The water that supplies the ducts is drawn from wells by a mule who turns a wheel with buckets on it.]
[52] [ There is not a word here about the cattle of the sun-god.]
[53] [ The writer evidently thought that green, growing wood might also be well seasoned.]
[54] [ The reader will note that the river was flowing with salt water i.e.
that it was tidal.]
[55] [ Then the Ogygian island was not so far off, but that Nausicaa might be assumed to know where it was.]
[56] [ Greek {Greek}] [57] [ I suspect a family joke, or sly allusion to some thing of which we know nothing, in this story of Eurymedusa’s having been brought from Apeira.
The Greek word “apeiros” means “inexperienced,” “ignorant.” Is it possible that Eurymedusa was notoriously incompetent?]
[58] [ Polyphemus was also son to Neptune, see “Od.” ix.
412, 529. he was therefore half brother to Nausithous, half uncle to King Alcinous, and half great uncle to Nausicaa.]
[59] [ It would seem as though the writer thought that Marathon was close to Athens.]
[60] [ Here the writer, knowing that she is drawing (with embellishments) from things actually existing, becomes impatient of past tenses and slides into the present.]
[61] [ This is hidden malice, implying that the Phaeacian magnates were no better than they should be.
The final drink-offering should have been made to Jove or Neptune, not to the god of thievishness and rascality of all kinds.
In line 164 we do indeed find Echeneus proposing that a drink-offering should be made to Jove, but Mercury is evidently, according to our authoress, the god who was most likely to be of use to them.]
[62] [ The fact of Alcinous knowing anything about the Cyclopes suggests that in the writer’s mind Scheria and the country of the Cyclopes were not very far from one another.
I take the Cyclopes and the giants to be one and the same people.]
[63] [ “My property, etc.” The authoress is here adopting an Iliadic line (xix.
333), and this must account for the absence of all reference to Penelope.
If she had happened to remember “Il.” v. 213, she would doubtless have appropriated it by preference, for that line reads “my country, _my wife_, and all the greatness of my house.”] [64] [ The at first inexplicable sleep of Ulysses (bk.
xiii.
79, etc.)
is here, as also in viii.
445, being obviously prepared.
The writer evidently attached the utmost importance to it.
Those who know that the harbour which did duty with the writer of the “Odyssey” for the one in which Ulysses landed in Ithaca, was only about 2 miles from the place in which Ulysses is now talking with Alcinous, will understand why the sleep was so necessary.]
[65] [ There were two classes—the lower who were found in provisions which they had to cook for themselves in the yards and outer precincts, where they would also eat—and the upper who would eat in the cloisters of the inner court, and have their cooking done for them.]
[66] [ Translation very dubious.
I suppose the {Greek} here to be the covered sheds that ran round the outer courtyard.
See illustrations at the end of bk.
iii.]
[67] [ The writer apparently deems that the words “as compared with what oxen can plough in the same time” go without saying.
Not so the writer of the “Iliad” from which the Odyssean passage is probably taken.
He explains that mules can plough quicker than oxen (“Il.” x.
351-353)] [68] [ It was very fortunate that such a disc happened to be there, seeing that none like it were in common use.]
[69] [ “Il.” xiii.
37.
Here, as so often elsewhere in the “Odyssey,” the appropriation of an Iliadic line which is not quite appropriate puzzles the reader.
The “they” is not the chains, nor yet Mars and Venus.
It is an overflow from the Iliadic passage in which Neptune hobbles his horses in bonds “which none could either unloose or break so that they might stay there in that place.” If the line would have scanned without the addition of the words “so that they might stay there in that place,” they would have been omitted in the “Odyssey.”] [70] [ The reader will note that Alcinous never goes beyond saying that he is going to give the goblet; he never gives it.
Elsewhere in both “Iliad” and “Odyssey” the offer of a present is immediately followed by the statement that it was given and received gladly—Alcinous actually does give a chest and a cloak and shirt—probably also some of the corn and wine for the long two-mile voyage was provided by him—but it is quite plain that he gave no talent and no cup.]
[71] [ “Il.” xviii.
344-349.
These lines in the “Iliad” tell of the preparation for washing the body of Patroclus, and I am not pleased that the writer of the “Odyssey” should have adopted them here.]
[72] [ see note [64] : ] [73] [ see note [43] : ] [74] [ The reader will find this threat fulfilled in bk.
xiii] [75] [ If the other islands lay some distance away from Ithaca (which the word {Greek} suggests), what becomes of the πόρθμος or gut between Ithaca and Samos which we hear of in Bks.
iv.
and xv.?
I suspect that the authoress in her mind makes Telemachus come back from Pylos to the Lilybaean promontory and thence to Trapani through the strait between the _Isola Grande_ and the mainland—the island of Asteria being the one on which Motya afterwards stood.]
[76] [ “Il.” xviii.
533-534.
The sudden lapse into the third person here for a couple of lines is due to the fact that the two Iliadic lines taken are in the third person.]
[77] [ cf.
“Il.” ii.
776.
The words in both “Iliad” and “Odyssey” are [Footnote Greek].
In the “Iliad” they are used of the horses of Achilles’ followers as they stood idle, “champing lotus.”] [78] [ I take all this passage about the Cyclopes having no ships to be sarcastic—meaning, “You people of Drepanum have no excuse for not colonising the island of Favognana, which you could easily do, for you have plenty of ships, and the island is a very good one.” For that the island so fully described here is the Aegadean or “goat” island of Favognana, and that the Cyclopes are the old Sican inhabitants of Mt.
Eryx should not be doubted.]
[79] [ For the reasons why it was necessary that the night should be so exceptionally dark see “The Authoress of the Odyssey” pp.
188-189.]
[80] [ None but such lambs as would suck if they were with their mothers would be left in the yard.
The older lambs should have been out feeding.
The authoress has got it all wrong, but it does not matter.
See “The Authoress of the Odyssey” p.
148.]
[81] [ This line is enclosed in brackets in the received text, and is omitted (with note) by Messrs. Butcher & Lang.
But lines enclosed in brackets are almost always genuine; all that brackets mean is that the bracketed passage puzzled some early editor, who nevertheless found it too well established in the text to venture on omitting it.
In the present case the line bracketed is the very last which a full-grown male editor would be likely to interpolate.
It is safer to infer that the writer, a young woman, not knowing or caring at which end of the ship the rudder should be, determined to make sure by placing it at both ends, which we shall find she presently does by repeating it (line 340) at the stern of the ship.
As for the two rocks thrown, the first I take to be the Asinelli, see map facing p. 80.
The second I see as the two contiguous islands of the Formiche, which are treated as one, see map facing p. 108.
The Asinelli is an island shaped like a boat, and pointing to the island of Favognana.
I think the authoress’s compatriots, who probably did not like her much better that she did them, jeered at the absurdity of Ulysses’ conduct, and saw the Asinelli or “donkeys,” not as the rock thrown by Polyphemus, but as the boat itself containing Ulysses and his men.]
[82] [ This line exists in the text here but not in the corresponding passage xii.
141.
I am inclined to think it is interpolated (probably by the poetess herself) from the first of lines xi.
115-137, which I can hardly doubt were added by the writer when the scheme of the work was enlarged and altered.
See “The Authoress of the Odyssey” pp.
254-255.]
[83] [ “Floating” (πλωτῇ) is not to be taken literally.
The island itself, as apart from its inhabitants, was quite normal.
There is no indication of its moving during the month that Ulysses stayed with Aeolus, and on his return from his unfortunate voyage, he seems to have found it in the same place.
The πλωτῇ in fact should no more be pressed than θοῇσι as applied to islands, “Odyssey” xv.
299—where they are called “flying” because the ship would fly past them.
So also the “Wanderers,” as explained by Buttmann; see note on “Odyssey” xii.
57.]
[84] [ Literally “for the ways of the night and of the day are near.” I have seen what Mr. Andrew Lang says (“Homer and the Epic,” p. 236, and “Longman’s Magazine” for January, 1898, p. 277) about the “amber route” and the “Sacred Way” in this connection; but until he gives his grounds for holding that the Mediterranean peoples in the Odyssean age used to go far North for their amber instead of getting it in Sicily, where it is still found in considerable quantities, I do not know what weight I ought to attach to his opinion.
I have been unable to find grounds for asserting that B.C.
1000 there was any commerce between the Mediterranean and the “Far North,” but I shall be very ready to learn if Mr. Lang will enlighten me.
See “The Authoress of the Odyssey” pp.
185-186.]
[85] [ One would have thought that when the sun was driving the stag down to the water, Ulysses might have observed its whereabouts.]
[86] [ See Hobbes of Malmesbury’s translation.]
[87] [ “Il.” vxiii.
349.
Again the writer draws from the washing the body of Patroclus—which offends.]
[88] [ This visit is wholly without topographical significance.]
[89] [ Brides presented themselves instinctively to the imagination of the writer, as the phase of humanity which she found most interesting.]
[90] [ Ulysses was, in fact, to become a missionary and preach Neptune to people who knew not his name.
I was fortunate enough to meet in Sicily a woman carrying one of these winnowing shovels; it was not much shorter than an oar, and I was able at once to see what the writer of the “Odyssey” intended.]
[91] [ I suppose the lines I have enclosed in brackets to have been added by the author when she enlarged her original scheme by the addition of books i.-iv.
and xiii.
(from line 187)-xxiv.
The reader will observe that in the corresponding passage (xii.
137-141) the prophecy ends with “after losing all your comrades,” and that there is no allusion to the suitors.
For fuller explanation see “The Authoress of the Odyssey” pp.
254-255.]
[92] [ The reader will remember that we are in the first year of Ulysses’ wanderings, Telemachus therefore was only eleven years old.
The same anachronism is made later on in this book.
See “The Authoress of the Odyssey” pp.
132-133.]
[93] [ Tradition says that she had hanged herself.
Cf.
“Odyssey” xv.
355, etc.]
[94] [ Not to be confounded with Aeolus king of the winds.]
[95] [ Melampus, vide book xv.
223, etc.]
[96] [ I have already said in a note on bk.
xi.
186 that at this point of Ulysses’ voyage Telemachus could only be between eleven and twelve years old.]
[97] [ Is the writer a man or a woman?]
[98] [ Cf.
“Il.” iv.
521, {Greek}.
The Odyssean line reads, {Greek}.
The famous dactylism, therefore, of the Odyssean line was probably suggested by that of the Ileadic rather than by a desire to accommodate sound to sense.
At any rate the double coincidence of a dactylic line, and an ending {Greek}, seems conclusive as to the familiarity of the writer of the “Odyssey” with the Iliadic line.]
[99] [ Off the coast of Sicily and South Italy, in the month of May, I have seen men fastened half way up a boat’s mast with their feet resting on a crosspiece, just large enough to support them.
From this point of vantage they spear sword-fish.
When I saw men thus employed I could hardly doubt that the writer of the “Odyssey” had seen others like them, and had them in her mind when describing the binding of Ulysses.
I have therefore with some diffidence ventured to depart from the received translation of ἰστοπέδη (cf.
Alcaeus frag.
18, where, however, it is very hard to say what ἰστοπέδαν means).
In Sophocles’ Lexicon I find a reference to Chrysostom (l, 242, A. Ed.
Benedictine Paris 1834-1839) for the word ἰστοπόδη, which is probably the same as ἰστοπέδη, but I have looked for the passage in vain.]
[100] [ The writer is at fault here and tries to put it off on Circe.
When Ulysses comes to take the route prescribed by Circe, he ought to pass either the Wanderers or some other difficulty of which we are not told, but he does not do so.
The Planctae, or Wanderers, merge into Scylla and Charybdis, and the alternative between them and something untold merges into the alternative whether Ulysses had better choose Scylla or Charybdis.
Yet from line 260, it seems we are to consider the Wanderers as having been passed by Ulysses; this appears even more plainly from xxiii.
327, in which Ulysses expressly mentions the Wandering rocks as having been between the Sirens and Scylla and Charybdis.
The writer, however, is evidently unaware that she does not quite understand her own story; her difficulty was perhaps due to the fact that though Trapanese sailors had given her a fair idea as to where all her other localities really were, no one in those days more than in our own could localise the Planctae, which in fact, as Buttmann has argued, were derived not from any particular spot, but from sailors’ tales about the difficulties of navigating the group of the Aeolian islands as a whole (see note on “Od.” x.
3).
Still the matter of the poor doves caught her fancy, so she would not forgo them.
The whirlwinds of fire and the smoke that hangs on Scylla suggests allusion to Stromboli and perhaps even Etna.
Scylla is on the Italian side, and therefore may be said to look West.
It is about 8 miles thence to the Sicilian coast, so Ulysses may be perfectly well told that after passing Scylla he will come to the Thrinacian island or Sicily.
Charybdis is transposed to a site some few miles to the north of its actual position.]
[101] [ I suppose this line to have been intercalated by the author when lines 426-446 were added.]
[102] [ For the reasons which enable us to identify the island of the two Sirens with the Lipari island now Salinas—the ancient Didyme, or “twin” island—see The Authoress of the Odyssey, pp.
195, 196.
The two Sirens doubtless were, as their name suggests, the whistling gusts, or avalanches of air that at times descend without a moment’s warning from the two lofty mountains of Salinas—as also from all high points in the neighbourhood.]
[103] [ See Admiral Smyth on the currents in the Straits of Messina, quoted in “The Authoress of the Odyssey,” p.
197.]
[104] [ In the islands of Favognana and Marettimo off Trapani I have seen men fish exactly as here described.
They chew bread into a paste and throw it into the sea to attract the fish, which they then spear.
No line is used.]
[105] [ The writer evidently regards Ulysses as on a coast that looked East at no great distance south of the Straits of Messina somewhere, say, near Tauromenium, now Taormina.]
[106] [ Surely there must be a line missing here to tell us that the keel and mast were carried down into Charybdis.
Besides, the aorist {Greek} in its present surrounding is perplexing.
I have translated it as though it were an imperfect; I see Messrs. Butcher and Lang translate it as a pluperfect, but surely Charybdis was in the act of sucking down the water when Ulysses arrived.]
[107] [ I suppose the passage within brackets to have been an afterthought but to have been written by the same hand as the rest of the poem.
I suppose xii.
103 to have been also added by the writer when she decided on sending Ulysses back to Charybdis.
The simile suggests the hand of the wife or daughter of a magistrate who had often seen her father come in cross and tired.]
[108] [ Gr.
πολυδαίδαλος.
This puts coined money out of the question, but nevertheless implies that the gold had been worked into ornaments of some kind.]
[109] [ I suppose Teiresias’ prophecy of bk.
xi.
114-120 had made no impression on Ulysses.
More probably the prophecy was an afterthought, intercalated, as I have already said, by the authoress when she changed her scheme.]
[110] [ A male writer would have made Ulysses say, not “may you give satisfaction to your wives,” but “may your wives give satisfaction to you.”] [111] [ See note [64].]
[112] [ The land was in reality the shallow inlet, now the salt works of S. Cusumano—the neighbourhood of Trapani and Mt.
Eryx being made to do double duty, both as Scheria and Ithaca.
Hence the necessity for making Ulysses set out after dark, fall instantly into a profound sleep, and wake up on a morning so foggy that he could not see anything till the interviews between Neptune and Jove and between Ulysses and Minerva should have given the audience time to accept the situation.
See illustrations and map near the end of bks.
v. and vi.
respectively.]
[113] [ This cave, which is identifiable with singular completeness, is now called the “grotta del toro,” probably a corruption of “tesoro,” for it is held to contain a treasure.
See The Authoress of the Odyssey, pp.
167-170.]
[114] [ Probably they would.]
[115] [ Then it had a shallow shelving bottom.]
[116] [ Doubtless the road would pass the harbour in Odyssean times as it passes the salt works now; indeed, if there is to be a road at all there is no other level ground which it could take.
See map above referred to.]
[117] [ The rock at the end of the Northern harbour of Trapani, to which I suppose the writer of the “Odyssey” to be here referring, still bears the name Malconsiglio—“the rock of evil counsel.” There is a legend that it was a ship of Turkish pirates who were intending to attack Trapani, but the “Madonna di Trapani” crushed them under this rock just as they were coming into port.
My friend Cavaliere Giannitrapani of Trapani told me that his father used to tell him when he was a boy that if he would drop exactly three drops of oil on to the water near the rock, he would see the ship still at the bottom.
The legend is evidently a Christianised version of the Odyssean story, while the name supplies the additional detail that the disaster happened in consequence of an evil counsel.]
[118] [ It would seem then that the ship had got all the way back from Ithaca in about a quarter of an hour.]
[119] [ And may we not add “and also to prevent his recognising that he was only in the place where he had met Nausicaa two days earlier.”] [120] [ All this is to excuse the entire absence of Minerva from books ix.-xii., which I suppose had been written already, before the authoress had determined on making Minerva so prominent a character.]
[121] [ We have met with this somewhat lame attempt to cover the writer’s change of scheme at the end of bk.
vi.]
[122] [ I take the following from The Authoress of the Odyssey, p. 167.
“It is clear from the text that there were two [caves] not one, but some one has enclosed in brackets the two lines in which the second cave is mentioned, I presume because he found himself puzzled by having a second cave sprung upon him when up to this point he had only been told of one.
“I venture to think that if he had known the ground he would not have been puzzled, for there are two caves, distant about 80 or 100 yards from one another.” The cave in which Ulysses hid his treasure is, as I have already said, identifiable with singular completeness.
The other cave presents no special features, neither in the poem nor in nature.]
[123] [ There is no attempt to disguise the fact that Penelope had long given encouragement to the suitors.
The only defence set up is that she did not really mean to encourage them.
Would it not have been wiser to have tried a little discouragement?]
[124] [ See map near the end of bk.
vi.
_Ruccazzù dei corvi_ of course means “the rock of the ravens.” Both name and ravens still exist.]
[125] [ See The Authoress of the Odyssey, pp.
140, 141.
The real reason for sending Telemachus to Pylos and Lacedaemon was that the authoress might get Helen of Troy into her poem.
He was sent at the only point in the story at which he could be sent, so he must have gone then or not at all.]
[126] [ The site I assign to Eumaeus’s hut, close to the _Ruccazzù dei corvi_, is about 2,000 feet above the sea, and commands an extensive view.]
[127] [ Sandals such as Eumaeus was making are still worn in the Abruzzi and elsewhere.
An oblong piece of leather forms the sole: holes are cut at the four corners, and through these holes leathern straps are passed, which are bound round the foot and cross-gartered up the calf.]
[128] [ See note [75] : ] [129] [ Telemachus like many another good young man seems to expect every one to fetch and carry for him.]
[130] [ “Il.” vi.
288.
The store room was fragrant because it was made of cedar wood.
See “Il.” xxiv.
192.]
[131] [ cf.
“Il.” vi.
289 and 293-296.
The dress was kept at the bottom of the chest as one that would only be wanted on the greatest occasions; but surely the marriage of Hermione and of Megapenthes (bk, iv.
_ad init_.)
might have induced Helen to wear it on the preceding evening, in which case it could hardly have got back.
We find no hint here of Megapenthes’ recent marriage.]
[132] [ See note [83].]
[133] [ cf.
“Od.” xi.
196, etc.]
[134] [ The names Syra and Ortygia, on which island a great part of the Doric Syracuse was originally built, suggest that even in Odyssean times there was a prehistoric Syracuse, the existence of which was known to the writer of the poem.]
[135] [ Literally “where are the turnings of the sun.” Assuming, as we may safely do, that the Syra and Ortygia of the “Odyssey” refer to Syracuse, it is the fact that not far to the South of these places the land turns sharply round, so that mariners following the coast would find the sun upon the other side of their ship to that on which they’d had it hitherto.
Mr. A. S. Griffith has kindly called my attention to Herod iv.
42, where, speaking of the circumnavigation of Africa by Phoenician mariners under Necos, he writes: “On their return they declared—I for my part do not believe them, but perhaps others may—that in sailing round Libya [i.e.
Africa] they had the sun upon their right hand.
In this way was the extent of Libya first discovered.
“I take it that Eumaeus was made to have come from Syracuse because the writer thought she rather ought to have made something happen at Syracuse during her account of the voyages of Ulysses.
She could not, however, break his long drift from Charybdis to the island of Pantellaria; she therefore resolved to make it up to Syracuse in another way.” Modern excavations establish the existence of two and only two pre-Dorian communities at Syracuse; they were, so Dr. Orsi informed me, at Plemmirio and Cozzo Pantano.
See The Authoress of the Odyssey, pp.
211-213.]
[136] [ This harbour is again evidently the harbour in which Ulysses had landed, i.e.
the harbour that is now the salt works of S.
Cusumano.]
[137] [ This never can have been anything but very niggardly pay for some eight or nine days’ service.
I suppose the crew were to consider the pleasure of having had a trip to Pylos as a set off.
There is no trace of the dinner as having been actually given, either on the following or any other morning.]
[138] [ No hawk can tear its prey while it is on the wing.]
[139] [ The text is here apparently corrupt, and will not make sense as it stands.
I follow Messrs. Butcher & Lang in omitting line 101.]
[140] [ i.e.
to be milked, as in South Italian and Sicilian towns at the present day.]
[141] [ The butchering and making ready the carcases took place partly in the outer yard and partly in the open part of the inner court.]
[142] [ These words cannot mean that it would be afternoon soon after they were spoken.
Ulysses and Eumaeus reached the town which was “some way off” (xvii.
25) in time for the suitor’s early meal (xvii.
170 and 176) say at ten or eleven o’ clock.
The context of the rest of the book shows this.
Eumaeus and Ulysses, therefore, cannot have started later than eight or nine, and Eumaeus’s words must be taken as an exaggeration for the purpose of making Ulysses bestir himself.]
[143] [ I imagine the fountain to have been somewhere about where the church of the _Madonna di Trapani_ now stands, and to have been fed with water from what is now called the Fontana Diffali on Mt.
Eryx.]
[144] [ From this and other passages in the “Odyssey” it appears that we are in an age anterior to the use of coined money—an age when cauldrons, tripods, swords, cattle, chattels of all kinds, measures of corn, wine, or oil, etc.
etc., not to say pieces of gold, silver, bronze, or even iron, wrought more or less, but unstamped, were the nearest approach to a currency that had as yet been reached.]
[145] [ Gr.
ἐς μέσσον.]
[146] [ I correct these proofs abroad and am not within reach of Hesiod, but surely this passage suggests acquaintance with the Works and Ways, though it by no means compels it.]
[147] [ It would seem as though Eurynome and Euryclea were the same person.
See note 156] [148] [ It is plain, therefore, that Iris was commonly accepted as the messenger of the gods, though our authoress will never permit her to fetch or carry for any one.]
[149] [ i.e.
the doorway leading from the inner to the outer court.]
[150] [See note 156] [151] [ These, I imagine, must have been in the open part of the inner courtyard, where the maids also stood, and threw the light of their torches into the covered cloister that ran all round it.
The smoke would otherwise have been intolerable.]
[152] [ Translation very uncertain; vide Liddell and Scott, under {Greek}] [153] [ See photo on opposite page.]
[154] [ cf.
“Il.” ii.
184, and 217, 218.
An additional and well-marked feature being wanted to convince Penelope, the writer has taken the hunched shoulders of Thersites (who is mentioned immediately after Eurybates in the “Iliad”) and put them on to Eurybates’ back.]
[155] [ This is how geese are now fed in Sicily, at any rate in summer, when the grass is all burnt up.
I have never seen them grazing.]
[156] [ Lower down (line 143) Euryclea says it was herself that had thrown the cloak over Ulysses—for the plural should not be taken as implying more than one person.
The writer is evidently still fluctuating between Euryclea and Eurynome as the name for the old nurse.
She probably originally meant to call her Euryclea, but finding it not immediately easy to make Euryclea scan in xvii.
495, she hastily called her Eurynome, intending either to alter this name later or to change the earlier Euryclea’s into Eurynome.
She then drifted in to Eurynome as convenience further directed, still nevertheless hankering after Euryclea, till at last she found that the path of least resistance would lie in the direction of making Eurynome and Euryclea two persons.
Therefore in xxiii.
289-292 both Eurynome and “the nurse” (who can be none other than Euryclea) come on together.
I do not say that this is feminine, but it is not unfeminine.]
[157] [ See note [156]] [158] [ This, I take it, was immediately in front of the main entrance of the inner courtyard into the body of the house.]
[159] [ This is the only allusion to Sardinia in either “Iliad” or “Odyssey.”] [160] [ The normal translation of the Greek word would be “holding back,” “curbing,” “restraining,” but I cannot think that the writer meant this—she must have been using the word in its other sense of “having,” “holding,” “keeping,” “maintaining.”] [161] [ I have vainly tried to realise the construction of the fastening here described.]
[162] [ See plan of Ulysses’ house in the appendix.
It is evident that the open part of the court had no flooring but the natural soil.]
[163] [ See plan of Ulysses’ house, and note [175].]
[164] [ i.e.
the door that led into the body of the house.]
[165] [ This was, no doubt, the little table that was set for Ulysses, “Od.” xx.
259.
Surely the difficulty of this passage has been overrated.
I suppose the iron part of the axe to have been wedged into the handle, or bound securely to it—the handle being half buried in the ground.
The axe would be placed edgeways towards the archer, and he would have to shoot his arrow through the hole into which the handle was fitted when the axe was in use.
Twelve axes were placed in a row all at the same height, all exactly in front of one another, all edgeways to Ulysses whose arrow passed through all the holes from the first onward.
I cannot see how the Greek can bear any other interpretation, the words being, {Greek} “He did not miss a single hole from the first onwards.” {Greek} according to Liddell and Scott being “the hole for the handle of an axe, etc.,” while {Greek} (“Od.” v. 236) is, according to the same authorities, the handle itself.
The feat is absurdly impossible, but our authoress sometimes has a soul above impossibilities.]
[166] [ The reader will note how the spoiling of good food distresses the writer even in such a supreme moment as this.]
[167] [ Here we have it again.
Waste of substance comes first.]
[168] [ cf.
“Il.” iii.
337 and three other places.
It is strange that the author of the “Iliad” should find a little horse-hair so alarming.
Possibly enough she was merely borrowing a common form line from some earlier poet—or poetess—for this is a woman’s line rather than a man’s.]
[169] [ Or perhaps simply “window.” See plan in the appendix.]
[170] [ i.e.
the pavement on which Ulysses was standing.]
[171] [ The interpretation of lines 126-143 is most dubious, and at best we are in a region of melodrama: cf., however, i.
425, etc.
from which it appears that there was a tower in the outer court, and that Telemachus used to sleep in it.
The ὀρσοθύρα I take to be a door, or trap door, leading on to the roof above Telemachus’s bed room, which we are told was in a place that could be seen from all round—or it might be simply a window in Telemachus’s room looking out into the street.
From the top of the tower the outer world was to be told what was going on, but people could not get in by the ὀρσοθύρα: they would have to come in by the main entrance, and Melanthius explains that the mouth of the narrow passage (which was in the lands of Ulysses and his friends) commanded the only entrance by which help could come, so that there would be nothing gained by raising an alarm.
As for the ῥῶγες of line 143, no commentator ancient or modern has     been able to say what was intended—but whatever they were,     Melanthius could never carry twelve shields, twelve helmets, and     twelve spears.
Moreover, where he could go the others could go     also.
If a dozen suitors had followed Melanthius into the house     they could have attacked Ulysses in the rear, in which case, unless     Minerva had intervened promptly, the “Odyssey” would have had a     different ending.
But throughout the scene we are in a region of     extravagance rather than of true fiction—it cannot be taken     seriously by any but the very serious, until we come to the episode     of Phemius and Medon, where the writer begins to be at home again.]
[172] [ I presume it was intended that there should be a hook driven into the bearing-post.]
[173] [ What for?]
[174] [ Gr: {Greek}.
This is not {Greek}.]
[175] [ From lines 333 and 341 of this book, and lines 145 and 146 of bk.
xxi we can locate the approach to the {Greek} with some certainty.]
[176] [ But in xix.
500-502 Ulysses scolded Euryclea for offering information on this very point, and declared himself quite able to settle it for himself.]
[177] [ There were a hundred and eight Suitors.]
[178] [ Lord Grimthorpe, whose understanding does not lend itself to easy imposition, has been good enough to write to me about my conviction that the “Odyssey” was written by a woman, and to send me remarks upon the gross absurdity of the incident here recorded.
It is plain that all the authoress cared about was that the women should be hanged: as for attempting to realise, or to make her readers realise, how the hanging was done, this was of no consequence.
The reader must take her word for it and ask no questions.
Lord Grimthorpe wrote: “I had better send you my ideas about Nausicaa’s hanging of the maids (not ‘maidens,’ of whom Froude wrote so well in his ‘Science of History’) before I forget it all.
Luckily for me Liddell & Scott have specially translated most of the doubtful words, referring to this very place.
“A ship’s cable.
I don’t know how big a ship she meant, but it must have been a very small one indeed if its ‘cable’ could be used to tie tightly round a woman’s neck, and still more round a dozen of them ‘in a row,’ besides being strong enough to hold them and pull them all up.
“A dozen average women would need the weight and strength of more than a dozen strong heavy men even over the best pulley hung to the roof over them; and the idea of pulling them up by a rope hung anyhow round a pillar {Greek} is absurdly impossible; and how a dozen of them could be hung dangling round one post is a problem which a senior wrangler would be puzzled to answer... She had better have let Telemachus use his sword as he had intended till she changed his mind for him.”] [179] [ Then they had all been in Ulysses’ service over twenty years; perhaps the twelve guilty ones had been engaged more recently.]
[180] [ Translation very doubtful—cf.
“It.” xxiv.
598.]
[181] [ But why could she not at once ask to see the scar, of which Euryclea had told her, or why could not Ulysses have shown it to her?]
[182] [ The people of Ithaca seem to have been as fond of carping as the Phaeacians were in vi.
273, etc.]
[183] [ See note [156].
Ulysses’s bed room does not appear to have been upstairs, nor yet quite within the house.
Is it possible that it was “the domed room” round the outside of which the erring maids were, for aught we have heard to the contrary, still hanging?]
[184] [ Ulysses bedroom in the mind of the writer is here too apparently down stairs.]
[185] [ Penelope having been now sufficiently whitewashed, disappears from the poem.]
[186] [ So practised a washerwoman as our authoress doubtless knew that by this time the web must have become such a wreck that it would have gone to pieces in the wash.] A lady points out to me, just as these sheets are leaving my hands, that no really good needlewoman—no one, indeed, whose work or character was worth consideration—could have endured, no matter for what reason, the unpicking of her day’s work, day after day for between three and four years.]
[187] [ We must suppose Dolius not yet to know that his son Melanthius had been tortured, mutilated, and left to die by Ulysses’ orders on the preceding day, and that his daughter Melantho had been hanged.
Dolius was probably exceptionally simple-minded, and his name was ironical.
So on Mt.
Eryx I was shown a man who was always called Sonza Malizia or “Guileless”—he being held exceptionally cunning.]
*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ODYSSEY *** Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will be renamed.
Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!)
can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties.
Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.
Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark.
If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy.
You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research.
Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.
START: FULL LICENSE THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license.
Section 1.
General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works 1.A.
By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement.
If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
1.B.
"Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.
It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.
There are a few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.
See paragraph 1.C below.
There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.
See paragraph 1.E below.
1.C.
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.
Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States.
If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed.
Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work.
You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.
1.D.
The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work.
Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change.
If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg-tm work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United States.
1.E.
Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg: 1.E.1.
The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed:   This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and   most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no   restrictions whatsoever.
You may copy it, give it away or re-use it   under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this   eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org.
If you are not located in the   United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where   you are located before using this eBook.
1.E.2.
If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges.
If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.3.
If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder.
Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
1.E.4.
Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.
1.E.5.
Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg-tm License.
1.E.6.
You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word processing or hypertext form.
However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
1.E.7.
Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.8.
You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided that: * You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from   the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method   you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.
The fee is owed   to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has   agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project   Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.
Royalty payments must be paid   within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are   legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns.
Royalty   payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project   Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in   Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg   Literary Archive Foundation."
* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies   you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he   does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm   License.
You must require such a user to return or destroy all   copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue   all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm   works.
* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of   any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the   electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of   receipt of the work.
* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free   distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.
1.E.9.
If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.
Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
1.F.
1.F.1.
Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm collection.
Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.
1.F.2.
LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees.
YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.
YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
1.F.3.
LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from.
If you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund.
If you received the work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.
If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.
1.F.4.
Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
1.F.5.
Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law.
The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
1.F.6.
INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.
Section 2.
Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.
It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will remain freely available for generations to come.
In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org Section 3.
Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.
The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.
Email contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact Section 4.
Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment.
Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these requirements.
We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.
To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States.
U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and addresses.
Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate Section 5.
General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone.
For forty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.
Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included.
Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
Most people start at our website which has the main PG search facility: www.gutenberg.org This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm, including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
